Dufour, J., et al., Hydrogen triggered exothermic reaction in uranium metal. Phys. Lett.
A, 2000. 270: p. 254.
Hydrogen triggered exothermal reaction in uranium
metal
J. Dufour, D. Murat, X. Dufour, J. Foos
CNAM, Laboratoire des sciences nucléaires, 2 rue Conte, 75003 Paris, France
Received 3 November 1999; accepted 28 April 2000
Communicated by J.P. Vigier

Abstract
An exothermal reaction has been observed when submitting metallic uranium to the
combined action of a magnetic field and an electrical current. The set-up used to study
the phenomenon is described and results are given. A tentative explanation is given,
based on the possible existence of a still hypothetical proton/electron resonance.
Keywords: Uranium; Magnetic field; Electrical current; Exothermal nuclear reaction;
Proton/electron resonance

1. Introduction
We report here results obtained by submitting uranium metal to the combined action of
a pulsed electrical current and a magnetic field. We have observed what seems to be an
exothermal reaction occurring in the uranium. The magnitude of the exothermicity
observed is too high to be explained by any known chemical reaction. We thus present a
tentative explanation based on a hypothetical - and purely electromagnetic - resonance
proton/electron that could “catalyze” certain nuclear reactions of the uranium nuclides.
The protons involved are initially present in the uranium metal we use. The manufacturer
indicate an hydrogen content from 3 to 10 ppm weight (metal obtained by magnesium
reduction of the oxide). This hydrogen content is a common value for uranium prepared
using this method [1]. This tentative explanation is substantiated by the first indications
given by the mass spectrometry analysis of the uranium samples obtained in the
preliminary experiments.
2. Experimental strategy
Preliminary simplified calorimetric experiments (experiment placed in a box
exchanging heat with the air of the laboratory kept at 25°C, heat flux measured by the
temperature of the uranium metal), had given indications of an exothermal reaction
occurring in the metal. When certain types of currents (pulsed currents) were passed
through it and a magnetic field was simultaneously applied, more thermal energy was
recovered than electrical energy was put in. The analysis of the treated uranium samples
compared to the virgin ones showed the apparition of a significant amount of lead.
Moreover, by monitoring the gamma activity of the samples during and after treatment,
we observed no important variation of this activity [2].
Given these preliminary results, we thought it was worth looking more in details into
this reaction. The strategy we decided to follow has two steps:
 first: improve the calorimetry and master the conditions under which the
phenomenon occurs
 second: analyze the treated uranium samples by mass spectrometry (including
isotopic ratios) to confirm the apparition of lead we observed in the preliminary
experiments, monitor the gamma activity of these samples and test various other
metals to compare their behavior to that of uranium.
In parallel, we have tried to find a plausible, but still hypothetical, explanation for the
phenomenon.
We have now achieved the first step. We are going to describe the experimental set-up
and report the results it yields. We shall also present the hypothetical explanation we
propose.
Before that, a brief summary of the preliminary experiments will be given.
3. Summary of the main results of the preliminary experiments
3.1. Thermal effect
Uranium samples (turnings of natural uranium metal) were pressed in a small reactor
between two steel electrodes (12 to 16 mm diameter, 10 mm long), themselves placed
between two permanent magnets of comparable diameter (remanence around 1 T). The
reactor was placed in a tight aluminum box, kept under argon atmosphere and could be
heated to the required temperature by a resistor. The heat flux was monitored by the
measurement of the reactor temperature. Three preliminary experiments yielded the
results summarized in Table 1 when a pulsed current was passed through the uranium.
Table 1
Results of preliminary experiments
Experiment A B C
Mean power due to the reaction (W) 3.8 0.8 1.2
Total energy of reaction during the experiment (kJ) 56.2 129.6 184.4
Reactor temperature (°C) 160-210°C 200°C 170°C
Uranium weight (mg) 545 540 553
Energy of reaction from 24.5 57.1 19.5
U processed (MJ/mole U)
Pulsed current intensity (A) 16 to 0
(U oxidation)
15 13
Table 2
Results
Experiment Ref. Ref. A B C
Pb content (ppm) 2.1 2.7 156 209 440
Energy of reaction per atom - - 1.8 3 2
Pb produced (MeV/ Pb atom)
3.2. Mass spectrometry analysis
Uranium samples were dissolved in two steps: uranium react with hydrochloric acid
rapidly to form uranium (IV) chloride and a black precipitate of hydrated uranium (III-
IV) oxide. Hydrogen peroxide is then added to the solution for a complete dissolution of
the precipitate to obtain a clear uranyl chloride solution [3].
The samples were analyzed by ICP-MS. Reference samples exhibit very low lead
quantity, whereas samples that had been treated with pulsed current under a magnetic
field (sample A, B and C) exhibit a much higher lead quantity. Combining these results
with those obtained in the calorimetric measurements yields the Table 2.
It is clear from Tables 1 and 2 that no chemical reaction involving the uranium can
explain the observed difference between the energy input and the energy output and that
this difference per atom of lead produced point towards a nuclear reaction involving the
uranium nuclei.
3.3. Gamma photons registration
Gamma photons emitted by the uranium samples during and after treatment were
registered (Ortec germanium detector). We only observed small variations of the samples
total activity (up to plus or minus 10% of the initial total activity). Most of the variations
are observed on the peaks of the first daughter of the 238U: 234Th. These variations are
well above background fluctuations. They are nevertheless hardly compatible with an
acceleration of the well known deactivation route leading from 238U to 206Pb, acceleration
which could explain the calorimetric results and the lead level we observe (the gamma
activity would tremendously increase). This point will be dealt with later.
4. Principle of the improved calorimetric measurements now in use
The observation of the phenomenon was done in the following conditions:
 uranium metal at relatively high temperature – 200°C – without oxidation
 experiment of several days
 a sufficient amount of uranium – more than 500 mg – in order to allow
subsequent analysis of the sample by mass spectrometry
 the passage of a high electrical current: 15 A
 the presence of a high magnetic field: 1 tesla
This precludes the use of classical calorimetric methods as for instance currently
available Calvet or Seebeck calorimeters (whether the total heat flux is measured by
thermocouples or by the Seebeck effect of a semiconductor). The experiment indeed
requires a minimum volume of 500 cm3 and we do not have such equipment in the lab.
We have thus been compelled to develop an alternative approach, adapted to the required
conditions for the phenomenon to be observed and presenting a sufficient degree of
reliability. The principle of the calorimetric measurement is to compare the thermal effect
of a pulsed current versus the thermal effect of a direct current. Fig. 1 is a description of
the overall experimental set-up.
Fig. 1. Description of the experimental set up.
4.1. Principle and description of the electrical measurements
We need to measure the electrical power P that is dissipated in our experimental
device.
    
T
IUttitu
T
P
0
d
1
,
where U and I are the root-mean-square (rms) values of the tension and the intensity.
IUP  if there is only pure resistance in our experimental device. IU  appears
to be an upper limit of the dissipated power. We decided to neglect any possible non-
resistive component of our experimental device. Thus, the dissipated power we consider
is a maximum value of the real dissipated power.
Fig. 2. Shape of the pulsed current.
The AOIP SA multi-channel data acquisition system we use is designed to measure the
tension (or the intensity) of a direct current. With a pulsed current (Fig. 2) the given value
is the mean one:
 
T
ttu
T
U
0
d
1
where T is the integration time (T = 140 ms i.e. about 700 signal periods).
h
h
h U
TT
T
U 


1
, (1)
 



TT
h
h
ttu
TT
U
0
2
1
d
1
h
h
h U
TT
T



1
, (2)
From Eqs. (1) and (2) we have
U
T
TT
U
h
h 

 (3)
and
I
T
TT
I
h
h 

 (4)
Thus
IU
T
TT
P
h
h 

 (5)
f=(Th+T1)/Th is a factor, which depends on the shape of the pulsed current. In order to
access this shape factor, we measure the thermal flux out of a thin film non-inductive
resistor in line with the experimental device. The resistor was put in a cubic aluminum
box. On each side of the box there is a thermoelectric generator that utilizes Seebeck
effect. The six thermoelectric generators are in line and we measure the voltage VSeebeck.
This simple calorimeter is calibrated with direct current, we obtain a correlation
  BIUAV
DCrSeebeck  . Then we infer the shape factor f from the response of this
calorimeter, from the measured rU the resistor voltage and from I when we use a pulsed
current.
4.2. Description of the experimental device
A DC electrical generator delivers electrical power into a reactor containing the
uranium metal. The electrical power is delivered either in the form of constant direct
current, through connection OB or in the form of pulsed current through connection OA.
The pulsed current is shaped by the action of a transistor (International Rectifier Power
MOFSET type IRL 3803), which is triggered by a function generator (Metrix GX 245)
(Fig. 1).
Natural uranium metal turnings (3 mm width, 0.1 to 0.3 mm thick and cut into pieces
of about 10 mm length) are placed between two cylindrical iron electrodes (16 mm
diameter), according to Fig. 3. The first electrode is 9 mm long and the second 22 mm
(central electrode, with a 10 mm hole in its center). A third electrode, identical to the first
one is placed in contact with the central electrode. Two wires are fixed by solder on
electrodes 1 and 3, allowing electrical current to be passed through electrode 1, the
uranium turnings, the central electrode and electrode 3. Three wires allow the measure of
UU and URE. Two identical magnets (10 mm length, 15 mm diameter are placed in
contact with electrodes 1 and 3 in such a way that they generate, through the uranium and
the electrodes, a magnetic field parallel to the axis of the electrodes. They are made from
cobalt/samarium, have a magnetic remanence of 1 T and can withstand 300°C without
loosing their magnetism. Three temperature sensors (Pt 100) are placed in the central
electrode: two at each ends, in two 3 mm diameter holes bored at 4 mm from the two
edges of this electrode, and one in the central, 10 mm diameter hole and measure
respectively TU (temperature of the uranium side), TRE (temperature of the reference
resistor side) and Treg (regulation of the temperature level of the experiment).
Fig. 3. Reactor.
The three electrodes and the two magnets are enclosed in two identical aluminum
cylinders acting as a regulated heater (see Fig. 4). Each cylinder is 50 mm diameter and
40 mm long. A hole in the cylinders allows the exit of the wires connected to the
electrodes. Four heating cartridges 76 mm long and 6.3 mm diameter (RS component) are
introduced in four holes bored through the aluminum cylinders and heat them in a
regulated way (Auto-tune temperature controller CAL 9400, delivering electrical power
to the heating cartridges from a DC generator on a zero/full power basis). The two
aluminum cylinders are pressed against the ends of both magnets by the action of four
bolts, parallel to the four heating cartridges (and not represented in Fig. 4).
The whole assembly is finally placed in a vacuum tight aluminum box, equipped with
the required passages for the wires conducting the current to the reactor and those
connecting the various sensors to the AOIP SA multi-channel data acquisition system that
monitors the experiment. The box is kept under vacuum (5 to 10 Pa) by the action of a
vacuum pump. Under these conditions, the oxidation of the uranium sample is controlled
at a very low rate for periods of several days and temperatures of the heater up to 200°C.
The differential power measurement device functions as follows:
 the temperature of the heater is set at a given value Treg (generally around 200°C).
Preliminary measurements have shown that REU TTT  varies slowly when
increasing Treg from ambient to 170°C and remains constant above 170°C up to
220°C. Let  0T be the value of ΔT when the heater has reached its preset value
Treg. The mean power dissipated by the heater to maintain Treg at 200°C is
typically around 60 W.
 a direct current is then passed through the three electrodes. The resistance RU of
the contacts steel / uranium turnings / steel is typically between 5 and 15 mΩ and
the corresponding resistance RRE of the reference contact resistance steel / steel
between 2 and 5 mΩ. The Joule power IUfIUW UU  on the uranium
side is thus higher than the Joule power IUfIUW RERERE  0 on the
reference side and ΔT increases. The intensity of the direct (or pulsed) current we
use is limited to 15 A. The power injected in the electrode system is thus limited
to less than 6 W, which is a small fraction of the power required to maintain the
heater at 200°C. The joule effect is thus a perturbation of the total heating and the
relative temperature difference  0TT  is a linear function of the difference
REU WWP  :
  PKTT  0 (6)
K is essentially determined by the geometry of the electrodes and by their thermal
conduction properties (the experiment being under vacuum, the main heat transfer
mechanism is conduction). This relation has been checked experimentally to be very
accurate.
If an exothermal reaction, yielding a power PE, takes place in the uranium, relation (6)
is no longer valid and is replaced by:
   EPPKTT  0 . (7)
We measure K when passing direct currents of various intensities in the electrodes. In all
our experiments, we have observed that when plotting ΔP versus  0TT  we obtain a
very good linear relation:
  0
1 TTKP   . (8)
If we switch to pulsed currents (without changing the experimental set-up) the points
obtained are systematically on the right side of this straight line as explain on the scheme
Fig. 5. We can calculate PE from the measurements of WU, WRE and  0TT  when
passing the pulsed current and the correlation obtained when passing the direct current:
   pulseE PTTKP  
0
1 . (9)
Remark. Two second order corrections have to be taken into account to get precise
measurements:
 Due to small modifications in the heating power of the cartridges, we observe a
small and continuous drift of  0T during the course of an experiment (0.03 to
0.07 K/day). We measure this drift and accordingly correct the temperature
differences.
 Both resistance RU and RRE vary slowly with time. When this variation is too fast,
 0TT  is somewhat lagging behind ΔP, resulting when ΔP increases during
the calibration with direct current, in an under estimation of the power injected
given by (8). In order to be on the safe side, we eliminate these points from
correlation (8), which represent 5 to 10% of the points.
Fig. 4. Reactor heating system.
Fig. 5. P versus ΔT-(ΔT)0.
5. Experimental results
We report here the results of an experiment run with uranium. 788 mg of uranium
turnings were placed in the reactor and the experiment was run according to the following
protocol.
5.1. Experimental protocol
The following operations are run in sequence.
 Measurement of  0T . The heater is heated at four temperatures (TReg = 170, 190,
200 and 210°C), to check the absence of variation of  0T with TReg.  0T is
taken at the temperature of the experiment (around 200°C). Duration 24 h. The
temperature of the reactor is then set at TReg = 200°C.
 Calibration of the shape factor measurement device. A direct current (three
intensities: 5, 10 and 15 A) is passed through the experimental set-up (Fig. 2,
contact OB closed). Duration 36 h. This yields a relation (10) between  
DCr IU 
and VSeebeck. A linear relation gives a correlation coefficient higher than 99%.
  BIUAV
DCrSeebeck  (10)
 Establishment of the relation between ΔP and  0TT  when a direct current is
passed through the metal under test (baseline of the experiment). This is done at
the same time as the calibration of the shape factor measurement device and
yields relation (3). A linear relation gives a correlation coefficient higher than
99%.
 Determination of the drift of  0T with time. The DC current is cut and  0T is
measured at TReg = 200°C
 Effect of the pulsed current on the metal under test. The contact OB is switch to
OA and kept in this position for several days.
 Determination of the drift of  0T with time. The pulsed current is cut and  0T
is measured at TReg = 200°C.
 Back-checking of relation (3) and (10). The direct current is switched on again
(contact OB closed) and various intensities are passed through the experimental
device to yield an f factor calibration curve and a baseline of the experiment
extending on both sides of the results obtained with the pulsed current (see below).
 Determination of the drift of  0T with time. The DC current is cut-off and
 0T is measured at TReg = 200°C.
5.2. Presentation of the results
Fig. 6 shows how the measured ΔP varies as a function of the  0TT  measured.
For direct current, the experimental points fall (with a correlation coefficient better than
0.99) on a straight line. The corresponding coefficient K-1 of relation (3) is 989 mWK-1.
The situation is different when pulsed current is passed through the uranium. All points
fall on the right side of correlation (3), indicating that the power PE of an exothermal
reaction occurring in the uranium is added to the power generated by the Joule effect in
it.
We can then use relation (9) to calculate PE and consider its evolution with time. Fig. 7
shows this evolution. It can be seen from this graph that:
 PE is about zero (mean value – 10 mW, standard deviation 15 mW), when a direct
current is passed through the uranium (before and after the pulsed current is
passed through it).
 PE is continuously increasing from some 50 mW to nearly 900 mW, when a
pulsed current is passed through the uranium sample.
Fig. 6. Experimental results (P versus ΔT - (ΔT)0).
Fig. 7. Experimental results (PE and RU versus time).
5.3. Discussion of the results
We now discuss some possible trivial explanations of these results:
 Effect of the shape factor f. We find for relation (10) the following coefficients: A
= 110.5 mV/W and B = 21.9 mV. From these values, we can calculate the shape
factor as
 
 
)10(fromSeebeck
measuredSeebeck
V
V
f  .
Over the whole duration of the experiment, the following mean values were
obtained f = 1.00 (standard deviation 0.004) for the periods when direct current
was passed and f = 1.30 (standard deviation 0.009) when pulsed current was
passed. From these figures, we can conclude that the properties of the transistor
that shapes the pulsed current have not varied significantly during the experiment.
Moreover, the shape factor f is very close to the theoretical one (1.29) calculated
from the T1 and Th used in this experiment. The variations of f are thus second
order, whereas the ratio PE(WU+WRE) is continuously increasing from 0 to 28%
during the experiment (as can be seen in Fig. 8). This second order variation
cannot thus account for this result.
 effect of the variations of the resistance of the uranium. As can be seen in Fig. 7,
the resistance of the uranium has varied during the experiment. Periods of
stability of this parameter are found for instance between day 3 and day 4, when
PE continuously increased. This increase cannot thus be attributed to the lagging
of  0TT  behind ΔP. In the period day 2 to day 3, the resistance of the
uranium has increased twice abruptly. It can be seen in Fig. 7 that PE has also
increased sharply but has come back to the general trend of PE after the
subsequent decrease of the resistance.
From these considerations, we conclude that no trivial explanation can account for the
observed value of PE. This value is of an order of magnitude comparable to what we
observed in our preliminary experiments and justifies the strategy we have chosen.
Fig. 8. Experimental results (PE/(WU + WRE) versus time).
6. A possible and hypothetical explanation of these results
We give here a possible but still hypothetical explanation of the phenomenon we
observe and this for two reasons:
 we use this explanation as a guideline for our experiments.
 it might thus help the reader to understand our approach.
We assume the possibility of the existence of a resonance between a proton and an
electron, yielding a particle of almost nuclear dimensions (a few fm) and we examine the
possible consequences of the existence of such a particle.
The hydrogen atom is one of the best known objects of physics and its properties can
be completely calculated up to the third order interactions (hydrogen hyperfine structure).
This last interaction results from the effect of potentials, which are very strong at very
short distances of the electron from the proton, but are only third order when averaged on
the whole volume of the atom (magnetic interactions between the proton and the electron,
described by the hyperfine structure Hamiltonian).
The question has been raised [4,5] whether this interaction could yield a much smaller
object than the known hydrogen atom. In such an object, it would of course be first order
on the whole interaction volume.
A quantum electrodynamics calculation was performed on the proton/electron system
[6,7], pointing to the possibility of the existence of a resonance (life time of a few
seconds, dimensions of a few fm and an endothermic energy of formation of a few eV).
This resonance has been proposed to explain some hypothetical nuclear reactions [8,9].
We assume the existence of this resonance (which for simplicity of language we
propose to call hydrex: H
~1
1 . We guess some of its properties and use them to improve its
synthesis and explain how it could act on nuclei to “catalyze” certain classes of nuclear
reactions.
6.1. Main properties of hydrex that can reasonably be imagined
 The magnetic moment of the electron should have the same direction as the
nuclear moment of the proton (probably parallel in the ground state and
antiparallel in excited states).
 Hydrex can be polarized in the high electrical field of a big nucleus (it could even
be a small permanent electrical dipole).
6.2. How do we try to improve the synthesis of hydrex
We start from protons enclosed in a dense medium (metallic hydrides where they have
a high mobility) and favor their collisions with the conduction electrons by passing an
electrical current through the hydride. As we think that these collisions are more efficient
to form hydrex if the magnetic moments of the two particles have the same direction
(whether they are parallel or antiparallel) we apply to the metallic hydride a magnetic
field (of intensity as high as possible) having the same direction as the current. Note that
contrary to the situation in vacuum, the protons and the electrons are submitted to
potentials due to the lattice that could also favor the formation of hydrex.
6.3. How hydrex, when formed, could “catalyze” certain nuclear reactions
Hydrex as we imagine it, is an electric dipole with almost nuclear dimensions. It can
thus be attracted by a uranium nucleus. Perhaps, one uranium nucleus and several hydrex
could form a cluster, with a lifetime on the order of seconds, which is considerably higher
than typical nuclear time (10-22 s). Thus, in this nuclear cluster, unusual nuclear reactions
could take place. Let us now examine two of them:
 Hydrex assisted α emission: the presence of several polarized hydrex in contact
with an uranium nucleus can modify its Coulomb barrier. Simple calculations,
using a layer model, have shown that the initial barrier (height 32 MeV, thickness
some 50 fm) could be split into two barriers: a first one close to the uranium
nucleus with same height, but much thinner (some 5 fm), followed, after a
potential well, by a second one of smaller height (15 to 17 MeV) and thickness 35
fm (the level of the potential well depends on the number of hydrex in the cluster).
Since the works of Gamow, Gurney and Condon in 1928, it has been well known
that the probability of alpha emission of a nucleus can vary considerably with
small variations of the height and thickness of the Coulomb barrier [10]. We thus
think that the rate of alpha emission of the 238U can be considerably increased in
our experiment due to the formation of the hydrex/uranium clusters [2].
 ω emission of the uranium: this is a reaction with no classical equivalent, that
could explain the absence of tremendous increase of the β- emission that should
be observed after an increase of the rate of the α emission. The first daughter of
238U is 234Th, which decays into 234Pa through β- emission (1/2 life time 24 days).
In the hydrex/uranium cluster, 2 neutrons of the uranium could react with 2
hydrex, to yield 232Th and 4He according to the reaction:
MeV17.3HeThH
~
2Th 4
2
232
90
ω1
1
234
90 
(ω emission)
The combination of these 2 types of reactions could give a route from uranium to lead
without β- emission.

7. Perspectives and conclusion
The improved calorimetric device that we have developed confirms our preliminary
experiments. The level of the power liberated in the uranium by the exothermal reaction
that we measure with the new device compares well with what we found previously: 0.9
W versus 3.8, 0.8 and 1.2 W. Moreover, the oxidation of the uranium can be controlled,
provided the vacuum of the experiment is of good quality.
We thus have planned a series of experiments to:
 measure the lead content of the uranium after treatment (including isotopic ratio)
and compare this level with the energy liberated by the exothermic reaction.
 test other metals to see if similar phenomenon are observed with them.
References
1. P. Pascal, in: Nouveau traité de chimie minérale, Tome XV, Masson, Paris,
France, p. 159.
2. J.J. Dufour, J.H. Foos, X.J.C. Dufour, ICCF7 Proa, ENECO, Salt Lake City, USA,
pp. 113-118.
3. R.P. Larsen, Anal. Chem. 31 (1959) 545.
4. A.O. Barut, J. Kraus, J. Math. Phys. 17 (1976) 506.
5. A.O. Barut, G. Craig, Physica A 197 (1993) 275.
6. J.R. Spence, J.P. Vary, Phys. Lett. B 254 (1991) 1.
7. J.R. Spence, J.P. Vary, Phys. Lett. B 271 (1991) 27.
8. F.J. Mayer, J.R. Reitz, Fusion Technology 20 (1991) 367.
9. R. Antanasijevic, I. Lakicevic, Z. Marie, D. Zevic, A. Zaric, J.P. Vigier, Phys.
Lett. A 180 (1993) 25.
10. J. Foos, in: Manuel de radioactivité à l’usage des utilisateurs, Formascience,
Orsay, France, pp. 25-33.
