1
McKubre, M.C.H., et al. Isothermal Flow Calorimetric Investigations of the D/Pd System. in Second
Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, "The Science of Cold Fusion". 1991. Como, Italy: Societa Italiana di
Fisica, Bologna, Italy.
ISOTHERMAL FLOW CALORIMETRIC INVESTIGATIONS OF
THE D/Pd SYSTEM
By: Michael C. H. McKubre, Romeu Rocha-Filho, Stuart I. Smedley,
Francis L. Tanzella
SRI International
and
Steven Crouch-Baker, Thomas O. Passell, Joseph Santucci
Electric Power Research Institute

INTRODUCTION
An experimental program was undertaken to explore the central idea proposed by
Fleischmann et al.1 that heat, and possibly nuclear products, could be created in palladium
lattices under electrolytic conditions.
Three types of experiments were performed to determine the factors that control the extent of
D loading in the Pd lattice, and to search for unusual calorimetric and nuclear effects. It is the
purpose of this communication to discuss observations of heat output observed calorimetrically in
excess of known sources of input heat.
The central postulate guiding the experimental program was that anomalous effects
previously unobserved or presently unexplained in the deuterium-palladium system occur at a
very high atomic ratio D/Pd. Emphasis was placed on studying phenomena that provide a
fundamental understanding of the mechanism by which D gains access to the Pd lattice, and how very
high loadings (near, at, or perhaps, beyond unity) can be achieved and maintained.
Measurements of the interfacial impedance and of the Pd cathode voltage with respect to
a thermodynamic reference electrode were made in order to characterize the electrochemical
kinetic and thermodynamic processes that control the absorption of D into Pd.
Measurements of the Pd solid phase resistivity were used to monitor on-line, the degree
of loading atomic ratios, specifically D/Pd, H/Pd and H/D. Calibration of the resistance ratio -
atomic ratio functionality has been made by reference primarily to the works of Baranowski2-4 and
Smith5-6, but also by volumetric observation of the displacement of gas during loading in a closed
system at constant pressure and temperature.
2

The overall conclusions of this study are that, by careful control of the electrode
pretreatment, the electrolyte composition and the current density, it is possible to load Pd to an atomic
ratio D/Pd >~ 1, and to sustain this loading for periods of weeks.
Calorimetric experiments were performed in palladium rods, highly loaded with D and/or
H, and electrolyzed at substantial current densities (typically 300-600 mA cm-2, but up to 6400
mA cm-2) for considerable periods of time (typically 1000-2000 hours). The application of
knowledge gained from the independent loading studies was essential in achieving these
conditions.
Our calorimeters were designed with the philosophy that in precise calorimetry, and in the
search for unusual reaction products, it is desirable to have a closed system, and a knowledge at
all times of the composition of the reacting system. All experiments were performed with closed
and sealed electrochemical cells operating from 40 to 10,000 psi above atmospheric pressure.
Axial resistance measurements were made to monitor the D/Pd or H/Pd ratio.
Approximately 30 experiments have been performed with flow calorimeters operating at
constant power input. The calorimeters were designed and constructed with the following
features:
 Conceptually simple system based on the first law of thermodynamics.
 Maintenance of complete control of operating parameters (including cell
temperature).
 A large dynamic range of heat input and output (0.1 - 100 W).
 On-line monitoring of all important variables.
 Multiple redundancy of measurement of critical variables e.g.
temperature.
 High accuracy and precision (the greater of 10 mW or 0.1%).
 Known sources of potential error yield conservative estimates of output
heat.
 Steady state operation leading to simple analysis.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Two systems of flow calorimeters were designed in accordance with the principles
outlined above. One system accommodated up to four large electrochemical cells (working
volume up to 200 cm3 and power input ≥ 100W). The other accommodated three “small” cells
(working volume 50 cm3 and power input up to ~ 30 W).
These two systems had several features in common. In both, a sealed electrochemical
cell was fitted with a helically wound compensation (and calibration) heater and sheathed with
axially oriented heat exchanging fins. This unit was immersed directly in the calorimeter heat
transfer fluid inside an isothermal and insulating boundary (the calorimeter). The isothermal
boundary was itself immersed in a well regulated (± .003°C) bath of the same fluid. In early
experiments this fluid was silicone oil, chosen for its low heat capacity, low corrosivity, and its
good electrical insulation properties. In recent experiments the calorimeter fluid was water for which
the heat capacity is better known and exhibits smaller dependence on temperature.
3
The heat transfer fluid was pumped from the bath, past the cell inside the calorimeter
volume, using FMI (QV-OSS Y) constant displacement pumps. The mass flow rate was determined
by pumping the flow to an auto siphon device placed on a digital balance. The
control/measurement computer polled the balance periodically to determine the average mass
flow rate as δm/δt
All experiments were performed with thermodynamically closed electrochemical cells at
D2 partial pressures between ambient and ~10,000 psi. In high pressure cells the charging current
was sustained by the anodic reaction of ½ D2 + OD- → D2O + e- (in base). At higher anodic
current densities or low D2 partial pressures, O2 was evolved at the anode. A large area catalyst was
provided in the head space of the cells to recombine evolved O2 and D2 so that the net reaction in all
cells after the Pd rod is loaded is D2O → D2O, for which the thermoneutral voltage is zero.
Constant current or slowly ramped current conditions were used in all cases. Commonly,
experiments were performed electrically in series in order to test the effects of different variables
e.g. D2O versus H2O. Under current control, the cathode voltage and cell voltage frequently were
observed to fluctuate significantly, particularly at high current densities in low pressure cells where
the presence of large D2 and O2 bubbles disrupted the electrolyte continuity. Three electrode
potentiostatic control, or two terminal voltage control of a series string, in the presence of a fluctuating
load (cell resistance) will cause a fluctuation in both the cell voltage and current and make an
unmeasured contribution to the input power (that may be interpreted incorrectly as excess heat)
unless the rms levels are monitored. On the other hand, if the cell current is provided from a source
that is sensibly immune to noise and level fluctuations, then the current would operate on the cell
voltage (or resistance) as a scalar. As long as the voltage noise or resistance fluctuations are random,
no unmeasured rms heating can result under constant current control.
The power input to the calorimeter by the electrochemical current was considered to be the
product of that current and the voltage at the isothermal boundary. Under experimental
conditions this input power changed due to voltage or resistance variations in the cell, or at times
when the current was ramped. This had two undesirable consequences. A change in input power
changed the cell temperature so that the electrochemical conditions were no longer under control. A
change in the temperature also moved the calorimeter from its steady state as the calorimeter
contents took up or released heat. To minimize these effects, a compensation heater was used to
correct for changes in electrochemical power so that the sum of the heater and electrochemical
power input to the calorimeter was held constant. A computer controlled, power supply was used to
drive the compensation heater element operated in galvanostatic mode in order to avoid possible
unmeasured rms heat input. This heater also was used for calorimeter calibration, where the input
power was measured as the product of the heater current and voltage at the isothermal boundary.
Figures 1 and 2 show schematic detail of the small and large calorimeter vessels.
Different strategies were employed in these two designs to minimize the conductive heat loss
through the many wires which enter the vessel for electrical sensing and current control. A simple
labyrinth design was used in the small calorimeter in which the electrical leads are taken from
the cell by a tortuous path to the outside, and are forced to give up heat in a counterflow of
incoming fluid. For the mass flow rates typically used in our experiments (1-2 g s-1), the conductive
power loss was of the order of 1-2% of the total input power calculated as above.
4
Figure 1. Small flow calorimeter, detail.
5
Figure 2. Large flow calorimeter, improved design.
6
Advantage was taken in the large calorimeters of the fact that the incoming fluid was at the
same temperature as the bath, and that predominant heat transport was upward. All electrical
leads were taken through the bottom insulating boundary across which ΔΤ (and therefore
conductive loss) was a minimum. An additional feature of the large calorimeters was the pressure
pipe which extended from the cell to a pressure transducer above the bath. The pressure pipe also
contained a PTFE catheter that was used to insert chemical species into operating cells. For
practical reasons the pressure pipe emerged through the top insulating boundary and contributed
an additional conductive loss term. For the mass flow rates used, conductive power loss in the
large calorimeters represented typically 3-5% of the total input power.
The steady state equation of heat output from the calorimeter can be given as
(1)
where Cp is the average value of the heat capacity of the calorimeter fluid in its transit through
the calorimeter, δm/δt is the fluid mass flow rate, k’ is the effective conductive loss term, Tin is
the inlet (or bath) temperature and Tout is the average temperature of the emerging fluid.
Similarly, for the power input to the calorimeter,
uhhccinput PVIVIP  (2)
where I is current, V is voltage measured at the calorimeter boundary, and subscripts c and h refer
to the electrochemical cell and compensation heater. The additional term, Pu, is any unaccounted
power source, and may be positive, negative or zero.
Currents were measured as a voltage dropped across a calibrated, series resistor;
hhrhccrc RVIRVI /;/  (3)
and the primary temperature measurements were made with platinum resistance temperature
devices (RTD’s), so that
   RRRTT / (4)
where T° is the temperature at which the device resistance is R°, and α is the temperature
coefficient of resistance of platinum.
In examining potential sources of error, it is useful to express Pu in terms of the directly
measured variables. Combining equations we obtain:
(5)
This equation has three different classes of variables and constants, with different
potential sources of error.
Measured variables: δm/δt, Rout, Rin, Vh, Vhr, Vc, Vcr
Predetermined constants: Cp, α, R°out, R°in, Rh, Rc
Calibration constant: k´
  inoutpoutput TTkmmCP   /
 
c
crc
h
hrh
in
in
out
out
pinputoutputu
R
VV
R
VV
R
R
R
R
k
t
m
CPPP 













 


/1
7
Efforts were made to maintain the accuracy of each parameter at better than 0.1%, and
also to ensure that potential sources of error result in an underestimate, not an overestimate, of Pu.
Errors in temperature measurement may be attributed to errors in the ratio’s R/R° or to α.
Resistance measurements were made in a four terminal mode where all RTD’s were multiplexed
sequentially to a single multimeter calibrated against NIST traceable standards. Since temperature
was measured from a resistance ratio, absolute calibration was not of primary importance,
although multimeter drift must be avoided Two RTD’s were used to sense the inlet and outlet
temperatures; the temperature difference was then calculated from the two independent pairs. The
inlet sensors were held at the bath temperature, and the bath was held constant with respect to a
calibrated thermistor. The inlet RTD’s can thus be regarded as secondary resistance standards,
referenced to the temperature set by the control thermistor. In this way any trend in resistance due
to change in multimeter calibration could be observed.
In some experiments the outlet temperature was sensed with an additional two thermistors
to guard further against range-specific resistance calibration drift.
The temperature coefficient of resistance, α, is easily calculated from the Calendar -Van-
Dusen equation, the constants of which for platinum are well known. White not independent of
temperature, α is effectively constant within a small temperature range. This value was considered
unlikely to change with time. Inlet and outlet temperatures each were measured with an accuracy
of ± 0.001Κ.
Outlet power was determined primarily by the temperature difference and the product Cp
δm/δt. In all experiments reported here, high purity, air saturated H2O was used as the
calorimeter fluid, for which the thermal capacity was taken to be 4.188 ± 0.004 J g-1 K-1 in the
interval 30 ≤ T ≤ 40°C.
Mass flow rates were measured using a Setra model 5000L digital balance with an
accuracy of better than 0.01% (200 ± .01g / 240 ± .01 seconds). This accuracy reflects the
determination of the mass delivered to the balance. Precautions were taken to ensure that fluid
was not lost following its transit through the cell before flow rate determination. This was
checked, and assured, by employing a ¼” line with Swagelok® fittings from calorimeter to
pump, and pump to mass balance. The calorimeter vessel was placed on the negative pressure side
of the constant displacement pump so that potential leaks from the bath into the calorimeter would
be of fluid conveyed past the outlet temperature sensors. Beyond this point leaks would have
allowed air into the system; this would not have produced errors in flow rate determination
(although this may influence the flow rate).
A schematic diagram of the placement of the large calorimeters in their constant
temperature bath is shown from a top view and in profile in Figures 3 and 4; Figure 5 shows the
hydraulic flow system for two cells in the large bath. The cells were placed on legs to be above
the bottom of the bath and in the well-mixed water. The water supplied to the bath was purified
first by ion exchange and then by reverse osmosis. The rate of supply was approximately twice
that withdrawn by the calorimeter pumps so that level of the bath was maintained by overflow.
In the large bath, electrochemical cells were connected electrically in series, but the
calorimeter systems were hydraulically in parallel. Separate pumps were provided for each
calorimeter and the flows were multiplexed for two cells to a single mass-balance. Mass flow
rates were measured for one cell during the filling of the auto-siphon vessel (capacity ~ 3500 cc).
8
When the computer sensed that the auto-siphon was operating (δm/δt < 0) the output of both
pumps was sent to waste. After a predetermined time, flow from the previously unmeasured cell
was sent to the vessel and the cycle repeated. The constant displacement pumps used were
relatively immune to a flow rate variation with small changes in head. Nevertheless, care was
taken to ensure that the flow rate during the measurement period was the same as that during the
eclipse when flow was sent directly to waste. This was done by ensuring that the hydraulic
resistance and static heads from the pump to the point at which the flow emerges to the siphon
vessel were the same as those from pump to waste. In a number of experiments the flow rate
was continuously monitored volumetrically using a rotameter for each cell, to further insure
against errors.
Input power was determined for both the cell and the heater as the product of two
measured voltages normalized by a precalibrated resistance. Voltages were measured using a
Keithley 195A 5-1/2 digit digital multimeter with 0.01% dc volt accuracy and 0.015% resistance
accuracy. Resolution was 1 ppm (Ω) and 10 ppm (dcV). Each 5-1/2 digit measurement was
averaged 32 times before being recorded. Resistance standards were calibrated periodically
against NIST traceable standards using NIST traceable calibration-instruments yielding an
accuracy of ~ 0.1 %
It is important to note that experiments typically were run with a single controlled current
passing through two or more electrochemical cells in series. All measurements were multiplexed
to a single multimeter that was periodically interchanged with another precalibrated meter. In
this way, a series cell effectively acted as a standard for the others; if Pu was observed not to be
zero in one cell while zero in another, then its origin was unlikely to be an artifact of voltmeter
miscalibration. Monotonic calibration drift was monitored by multimeter interchange. The
current was monitored independently in each of the cells in series so that Rc for each cell acted as
a standard for other series cells. The resistors were interchanged, replaced, and removed and
recalibrated during periods of excess power production (Pu > 0), reducing the likelihood that errors
were associated with the measurement of current.
9
Figure 3. Large bath for calorimetric experiments, top view.
10
Figure 4. Large bath for calorimetric experiments, side view.
Figure 5. Hydraulic flow system for calorimetric experiments
11
The remaining term in equation [5] for discussion, is the “effective” conductive loss term,
k’. This term is special, and has been the subject of considerable analysis that is not reported
here. Conductive heat transport occurred because the electrochemical cell, its contents, and the
contents of the insulating, isothermal boundary of the calorimeter vessel, were at a temperature
different from that of their surroundings. By submerging the calorimeter vessels in a well-mixed,
well-controlled and constant temperature bath, the environment of primary significance was that
of the fluid bath . This fluid entered the vessel; in the small cell by a convolved path, in the large
cell at the bottom, on the cylindrical axis. Once the flow approached the cell or the conductors
contacting the cell it was heated. A conductive loss therefore occurred with respect to the bath.
An added complexity with the large calorimeter was heat transported through the pressure
pipe that emerged through the top insulating boundary. This pipe contacted the bath fluid but
terminated in the air above the bath. Depending on the ambient and cell temperatures, heat could
have been conducted in or out of the calorimeter.
A number of distributed heat conduction paths were therefore present which we have
analyzed at three levels of complexity. In a lumped parameter model the cell and heater inside
the enclosing metal boundary were treated as a point source that was represented by the average
properties: mass, heat capacity and temperature. This point source was considered to give up heat
to the flowing fluid and exchange heat conductively with the environment through the pressure
pipe, and with the bath through the conductive cables. The emerging fluid may exchange heat
with the bath through the walls and top of the calorimeter vessel.
In a distributed parameter model, we have determined the heat balance with sources and
sinks distributed in one dimension along the axis of the calorimeter. We considered separately
the inlet plenum (elements of flow after the inlet sensor and before the cell), along the length of
the cell, and in the outlet plenum (up to the outlet sensors at the calorimeter boundary).
These two approaches made use of the metallic boundary provided by the pressure vessel
and axial heat fins to approximate a heat source that was isothermal in the radial and axial
directions, (lumped parameter) or just the radial dimension (distributed parameter), without
consideration to the distribution of sources inside. A finite element model is being developed to
more accurately represent the various distributed heat sources: the two dimensional sources at
the anode and cathode interfaces, the three dimensional source of the electrolyte volume, the three
dimensional source of the recombiner at the top of the cell, the approximately two dimensional
source of the helical compensation heater, and the roughly linear sources of current flowing to
the cell in the conductive cables inside the calorimeter boundary.
The lumped parameter model has been analyzed for both the steady state and transient
response of the calorimeter. The distributed parameter model has been developed to obtain a
steady state solution, while no results have yet been obtained from the finite element model.
On the basis of the modeling, thus far, we are able to draw a number of useful

conclusions:
 It is meaningful to define an effective loss term, k’, composed of several
different heat flows from distributed sources.
 The value of k’ is negligibly influenced by the distribution of the heat
source within the pressure vessel.
12
 Within the variations of bath and room temperature experienced and
expected, k’ may be considered to be constant within the limits of
experimental error.
 Within the range of mass flow rates used, the calorimeter response could
be represented by a single exponential response, with time constant
varying approximately inversely with mass flow rate. Using water as the
calorimeter fluid at 1 g s-1 the time constant was approximately 16
minutes.
The data that we present here are based on a simple lumped parameter model with k’ taken
to be a constant determined by calibration. In the results presented, no correction was made for
departures from the steady state condition. However, failure to consider deviations from steady
state would yield transient errors in Pu, but no error in its average value or in excess energy.
There was one further point of concern in the determination of ΔΤ and hence k’ and Pout. It
is important that the temperatures measured accurately represent the average values at the inlet
and outlet. This was of little concern for the inlet temperatures since the fluid issues from a well-
mixed tank. Significant errors could result in the determination of ΔΤ, however, if the outlet
sensors were not placed in a region where the fluid flow was well mixed. Several solutions to
this problem were employed: porous plugs and packed beds to promote turbulence, fluidized
beds of glass spheres, and imposition of turbulent flow through a Venturi orifice.
Calibration was performed first by determining the values of R° in-situ, under flow
conditions at known bath temperature and zero or low input power. The total input power was
then stepped to successively higher values using the heater (in the presence of low
electrochemical power), allowing at least 20 time constants (~ 6 hours) to reach a steady state.
The quantities δm/δt, Rout, Rin, Vh, Vhr, Vc, Vcr were measured on line and the steady state values
were fitted to equation [5], assuming Pu = 0, to determined k’. It should be noted that this method
of calibration determines k’ in terms of the other externally calibrated constants: Cp, Rout and Rin, α,
Rh and Rc, and the voltage calibration of the multimeter. In this way the cumulative inaccuracy of
the determination of k’ was greatly reduced. From this time on, only changes in calibrated values
would have given rise to error.
As stated above, the calorimeter was run under conditions of constant power. This was
achieved in a stepwise fashion. First, a maximum desired input power was established. Then the
heater was allowed to slowly turn off by ramping the electrochemical power while maintaining the
total power constant. In many experiments, and in all experiments for which the D/Pd ratio was
less than ~ 0.9 or the duration of electrolysis was ≤ 300 hours, the substitution of electrochemical
power for heater power yielded no excess power. That is, Pu = 0 ± 50 mW for Ptotal ≤ 18 W.
Apple Macintosh computers equipped with an ΙΟ-tech IEEE-488 interface, Keithley 706
scanner, Keithley 195A DMM, Tecrad DMO-350 micro-ohmeter, Setra 5000L balance, black box
COS/4 serial port multiplexer were used to record the parameters of the experiment. The
Macintosh interface controlled a Kepco BOP 20-20M power supply to apply cell current and a
Kepco BOP 50-2M power supply to control compensation heater power. The power supplies
were controlled using internal IEEE-488 interfaces. In addition to the parameters necessary for
calorimetric determinations, a number of variables are measured to monitor the physical and
electrochemical conditions of the experiments. A list of parameters follows:
13
Parameters Measured
Voltages: Cell at calorimeter boundary
Heater at calorimeter boundary Reference electrode
Currents: Cell
Heater
Temperatures: Bath (RTD)
Inlet (2 RTD)
Outlet (2 RTD+ 2 thermistor) Room ((RTD)
Room (RTD)
Transducers: Cell pressure
Volumetric flow (rotameter)
Gravimetric flow (multiplexed)
Palladium resistance (multiplexed to Tecrad DMO-350)
Figure 6. Electrochemical cell and pressure vessel for electrochemical experiments.
14
A Tecrad model DMO-350 micro-ohmeter was employed in a multiplexed mode to
monitor the axial resistance of Pd cathodes and thus determine the D/Pd loading. A Solartron
model 1250, 1254 or 1260 Frequency Response Analyzer, interfaced to an Apple Macintosh
microcomputer was used periodically during experiments to determine the Pd/electrolyte
interfacial impedance and thus assess the electrochemical condition of the interface.
Results are presented here from a series of five experiments performed in sequence,
designated P12-P16. This series of near-ambient temperature experiments was chosen to
demonstrate the features of internal consistency and experiment-to-experiment repeatability, the
necessity for high loadings and long times, the need for D2O and the use of H2O controls, and
the effect of current density on loading and excess heat production.
Αll experiments were performed using 0.3 cm diameter × 5 cm length Engelhard Pd
cathodes of 99.9% purity. Anodes were coaxial helices of Engelhard CP Platinum STD Grade Pt
thermocouple wire formed from 100 cm of 0.5mm diameter wire wound on 6 quartz rods. In all
cases the electrolyte was 1.0 molar in Li, formed by the reaction of 99.8% purity (natural isotopic
ratio) Aesar Li with H2O or D2O.
To perform an experiment, cathodes first were machined to the correct diameter with
grooves to receive the four 0.5 mm Pt wire contacts for current contact and axial resistance
measurement. Electrodes were then degreased and cleaned and the four wires mechanically
wrapped then spot welded into place. This assembly was annealed for 2 hours at 850°C in vacuo
allowed to cool in argon, rinsed in “heavy” or “light” aqua regia (for D2O or H2O experiments),
rinsed repeatedly in the appropriate water, dried, and carefully mounted inside the pre-prepared
anode cage avoiding contaminant contact. The assembled structure was placed inside the sheathed
pressure vessel, freshly prepared electrolyte added, and the vessel sealed (and pressurized with
D2). The pressure vessel was then installed in the calorimeter, charging current applied and
monitoring begun.
For the experiments described here, the large calorimeters were used; initial charging and
calibration were performed contemporaneously, as described in the previous section.
Experiment P12, which was the prototype for the sequence of experiments described
here, was performed alone in the large calorimeter bath. P12 was a heavy water experiment, and
exhibited output power in apparent excess of the known sources of input power. Pl3 was
prepared as a light water blank of P12, and replaced P12 in the calorimeter. Pl3 was run,
initially alone, using the same electronics as had been used for P12. After a period of ~ 600
hours, P14, a heavy water replicate of P12 was run electrically in series with P13, multiplexed
to the same electronics.
Experiments P15 and P16 were started simultaneously, electrically in series, following
the termination of P13 and P14. P15 and P16 both were heavy water cells. The cathodes in
experiments P12, P14 and P16 were implanted with helium following the 850°C annealing step,
and instead of the aqua regia etch, as an alternative electrode pretreatment. Typically 5 × 1016
atoms of helium were implanted to a depth of approximately 3 μm; 4He was used in P12 and
P14, 3He was used in P16. The act of implantation also resulted in a layer of metallurgical
damage or restructuring at the surface, < 1 μm thick.
15
RESULTS
In the space available it is not possible to present the data for the complete duration of the
experiments reported, or even of all the parameters measured in a single time interval. What is
presented here primarily are results of excess power, being the difference between the output and
known sources of input power, determined from equation [5].
A single episode of excess power is presented each for P12, P14 and P15; these are
intended to exemplify particular features of the apparent excess power production. In these
examples, Pl3 and P16 function as blanks, concurrent with Pl4 and P15, and sequential to P12.
For each of the cells P12 through P16, there were occasions when, for nominally identical
current ramps, similar average D/Pd ratios were obtained but with no manifestation of excess
power within the sensitivity of the calorimeter. For the full duration of the P13 experiment, the
calorimeter was observed in the steady state to be within ± 50 mW of thermal balance.
Figure 7 shows the electrochemical parameters together with the measured axial
resistance ratio and the calculated excess power for P12. Zero time on this plot represents a total
time of charging of 1300 hours. The results presented allow examination of the dynamic
response of the cathode voltage (measured with respect to a Pt pseudo-reference electrode), the
resistance ratio, the excess heat and the cathodic current density.
From 0 to ~280 hours, the calorimeter was operated at a constant input power of 10 W.
During this time the cell current was held constant at 0.1A (~20 mA cm-2) and 2.0A (~400 mA
cm-2) and ramped and stepped between these limits. The reference voltage and the Pd resistance
ratio exhibit a response to the current density. At the initial current density, the resistance ratio
attained a value of ~1.75, decreasing (corresponding to loading) slightly with time as the
reference voltages slowly increased, white the calorimeter maintains a thermal balance. As the
current increased, the reference voltage rose in part due to IR and kinetic effects, but the
resistance ratio fell to ~1.67 at ~100 mA cm-2 indicating that the electrode was absorbing
deuterium.
The increase in current density and absorption of deuterium was accompanied in this case
by an apparent evolution of excess power. The top curves in Figure 7 show raw data taken from
the two independent pairs of temperature sensors converted to excess power using equation [5].
Departures from steady state can be seen at times when the current was abruptly stepped at 60,
80, 90, 110 and 310 hours. Apart from this effect, the excess power responded essentially
monotonically with the current density, above a certain threshold value. At each instance of a step
in the current density, the excess power responded with a time constant indistinguishable from
that of the calorimeter. That is, the phenomenon that gave rise to this effect itself had a time
constant of a few tens of minutes or less.
It should be noted, however, that the resistance ratio did not decrease monotonically with
increasing current density; a maximum in loading apparently being achieved in this experiment
at current densities as low as ~200 mA cm-2. At higher current density the loading appears to
decrease, while the excess power increases.
During the sustained hold at 2A from ~160 to 280 h, the cell voltage slowly increased
due to loss of conductive species from the liquid phase in the cell At ~ 280 h the product Ic * Vc
exceeded 10 W so that the system departed further from its steady state, and the quality of data
16
was reduced. At ~303 h the total power was raised to 12 W, and at ~309 h the current was
reduced to 0.1 A. At this point it was clear from the resistance ratio that the electrode had de-
loaded. In subsequent experiments it was found not to be possible to re-load the electrode with
deuterium, or to observe excess heat. Following termination of P12, Pl3 was placed in the
calorimeter using the same hardware, electronics and flow system. This experiment was intended
as a blank, and an attempt was made to achieve nearly identical conditions to those of P12,
excepting only that the electrolyte was prepared from H2O and the cathode was not implanted
with helium. This experiment was operated for a total of 815 h and exercised over the same
range of current densities and loadings as P12, during which time the steady state response of the
calorimeter maintained a thermal balance, and within ± 50 mW no excess power was observed.
Figure 7. Experiment P12; cell current, reference voltage, resistance ratio and excess power.
P13 was operated alone in the calorimeter (as had been P12) for ~290 h at which time a
heavy water replicate of P12 was placed electrically in series, and hydrallically in parallel, in the
calorimeter. The current was ramped through the two cells in series, twice, with no observation
of excess heat in P13 or P14, despite the fact that both cells had apparently achieved loadings
17
H/Pd and D/Pd, respectively, of > 0.95. Figure 8 shows the results of the third occasion on
which P13 and P14 were jointly subjected to current ramps. The quality of the calorimetric data
was reduced because the two experiments were held under constant power control only for
periods within the time interval shown. At other times the total power was permitted to change as
the current and cell voltages changed. Total power for P13 varied over the time interval shown
from 8 to 15W; for P14 the range was 8 to 12.5W. Because of the reduced quality of the raw
data, the data shown in Figure 8 represent an approximately 1h average of data for both
independent pairs of temperature sensors. In each case, within the scatter of the data the two
sensor pairs reported identical steady state responses.
Although the observed excess power was small, in absolute, percentage and integral
(energy) terms, there was nevertheless a quantitative difference between the response of the heavy
water cell, P14, and the light water blank, to the current density stimulus. For both electrodes
there was a “high frequency” fluctuation of the excess power with periods of ~0.1 - 1h which
correlated with cell pressure variations, characteristic of partially intermittent operation of the
catalytic recombiner. Eliminating this feature, the excess power observed for P13 was essentially
flat and zero while that for P14 departed significantly from zero at current densities above ~200
mA cm-2, and generally increased with increased current density.
The current was sourced from the same device, and the electrical and calorimetric
parameters were measured with the same devices multiplexed between the two experiments,
making it less likely that the difference in results can be accounted for in terms of an instrumental
artifact.
Experiments P13 and P14 were replaced in the large calorimeter with P15 and P16, both
heavy water cells, nominally identical, and varying only in the electrode final treatment. The
cathode in P15 was subjected to annealing followed by heavy aqua regia rinse, while the P16
cathode was implanted with 3He as described above.
Figure 8. Current density and excess power for experiments Pl3 and P14.
18
Figure 9. Current density and mass flow rate for experiments Pl5 and P16.
Figure 9 shows the profile of current density for P15 and P16, for an interval of time in
this joint experiment that lasted at a total 1104 hours. Also shown in Figure 9 is the
gravimetrically determined calorimeter fluid mass flow rate for both cells.
In part because of the different electrode pretreatments the response of the loading of the
two cathodes to the ramped current density differs. Figure 10 shows the resistance ratio
calculated for P15 (heavy line) and P16 (light line); the dashed line interpolates a region where
data were not available for P16. It is clear that both electrodes absorbed deuterium in response to
the current ramp. For Pl6 the resistance ratio decreased from ~1.77 (D/Pd ≈ 0.9) at i = 33 mA
cm-2 to a minimum of ~1.6 (maximum loading D/Pd ≈ 0.97) at a current density i ≈ 500 mA cm-
2. For P15 the resistance ratio was always lower and decreased in resistance ratio from ~1.69
(D/Pd ~ 0.94) to a minimum of ~ .555 (maximum loading D/Pd ≈ 0.99) sustained at higher
currents and for longer times than P16. Because the temperature of the Pd cathode was
unknown, it was not possible to completely interpret the measured resistance ratio of P15 in
terms of the loading. Excess power would increase the temperature and hence the resistance of the
Pd cathode, and cause an underestimate of the loading. It is important to note that both electrodes
initially were rather well loaded, and became better loaded with increasing current during the
current ramp.
Figure 11 shows the temperatures registered by the inlet sensors of P15. Figure 12 shows
the total measured input power, initially controlled at 10 W and then stepped to 12 W as the cell
voltage rose at constant current. Also shown is the power in the heater used to compensate for
changes in the electrochemical input power due to the current ramps or temporal drift. Because
the temperature of the Pd cathode was unknown, it was not possible to completely interpret the
measured resistance ratio of P15 in terms of the loading. Excess power would increase the
temperature and hence the resistance of the Pd cathode, and cause an underestimate of the
loading. It is important to note that both electrodes initially were rather well loaded, and became
better loaded with increasing current during the current ramp. It is clear from Figures 9, 11 and
12 that, within the interval of time shown, the mass flow rate, the inlet temperature and the inlet
19
power for P15 all are sensibly constant. From inspection of equations [1] - [5] it is clear that,
provided that Pu is zero, the outlet temperatures also must be constant.
Figure 13 shows the measured profile of temperature for the two platinum resistance
sensors in the outlet plenum of the P15 calorimeter. Two thermistors also were present in the
outlet flow stream. All four sensors record essentially the same profile of temperatures, and these
were not constant, varying by as much as 0.6°C with a measurement accuracy of ± 0.001°C
(reduced for the thermistors) and sensitivity of 0.0001°C. The thermistors had a better precision
but lower accuracy than the RTD’s.
Figure 10. Resistance ratio for experiments Pl5 and P16.
Figure 11. Temperatures in the inlet plenum for experiment P15.
20
Figure 12. Total power and compensation heater power for experiment Pl5.
Figure 13. Temperatures in the outlet plenum for experiment P15.
One interpretation of the observed temperature variation is that there is an unknown
power source within the calorimeter of an amount that we can quantify using equation [5]. Figure
14 shows the “excess power” normalized with respect to the measured electrochemical input
power (Ic * Vc) and the controlled total power (Ic * Vc + Ih * Vh). A very irregular profile of
excess power is seen with a threshold at ~ 200 mA cm-2. The high frequency fluctuations of
period 0.1 - 1 h are present due to inconstant recombiner operation. Superimposed on the ramped
response to current also are apparently spontaneous fluctuations with substantially greater
amplitude and period (~ 3-6 h) that were not corrected to variations in pressure or any other of
the measured parameters of the system. It is worth noting that during this time interval, and
21
subjected to the same current, P16 exhibited no departure from the thermal balance that was
detected with the same instruments as for P15.
Figure 14. Excess power for experiment P15, expressed as a fraction of the electrochemical and total power
input.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have described a calorimetric tool for use in observing the characteristics
of unexplained thermal processes in the D/Pd system. Representative examples of results have

been given from which a number of observations and conclusions may be made.
We have observed unexplained excess heat in palladium cathodes when a minimum of
three criteria were met: an average loading (D/Pd) approaching or exceeding unity; this high
loading was maintained for considerable periods of time (100’s of hours for 3 mm diameter
cathodes); the interfacial current density exceeded a certain critical value.
With appropriate control of the interfacial conditions it has been shown to be possible to
load both H and D into Pd to molar ratios of approximately unity. Electrode preconditioning
apparently plays a significant role in the ability to attain and maintain high loading under
electrochemical conditions, and the appearance of unaccounted heat in deuterium loaded systems.
Helium implantation provides a suitable means of surface activation to facilitate loading; the
presence of helium is not obviously implicated in the generation of excess power.
For the thermodynamically closed and intentionally isothermal systems described here,
output power was observed to be as much as 28% in excess of the electrochemical input power
or 24% above the known total input power. When excess power was present, it was more
typically in the range 5-10%, in a calorimeter that was accurate to ±0.1%.
In the examples given the largest observation of excess energy corresponded to 1.08 MJ,
or 45.1 MJ/mole or ~450 eV/atom normalized to the Pd lattice or to the deuterium in the
palladium at a presumed loading of ~1.
The experiments reported here demonstrate that internal repeatability is possible when
the three criteria above are achieved. Apparent excess heat was observed under these conditions
22
when the current density reached a critical value, and excess heat was not observed when the
current density was reduced below the critical value. Furthermore, the threshold current density
appeared to decrease with time, up to the point that, due to interfacial or external effects, high
values of loading could no longer be attained or maintained.
There appeared also to be some degree of experimental reproducibility between cells.
Experiments P13-P16 were attempts to replicate P12 with only minor variations in electrode and
electrolyte treatment. All the heavy water experiments (P14, P15, P16) produced excess heat,
reproducing in general form the observation in P12 (excess heat data for Pl6 are not shown here).
It is worth noting, however, that excess power in these four experiments was not produced in
exactly the same amounts, or at exactly the same times, in response to the same stimuli. However,
we could not reproduce exactly the electrochemical conditions of cathodic overvoltage, the
loading (resistance ratio), and the interfacial impedance. Clearly there are issues of interfacial
contamination which arise in experiments with sustained high current electrolysis, that await
resolution.
Except for times when the calorimeter was caused to depart significantly from its steady
state condition, and during periodic fluctuations introduced by nonconstant recombiner
operation, “negative excess” was never observed. In terms of equation [5], Pu was observed
always to be positive or zero. Always, where significant quantities of H2O were used in the
electrolyte, Pu was zero. Also, no excess was observed before a critical “initiation time”, even in
cells that subsequently yielded values of Pu > 0.
As demonstrated in the P13/P14 and P15/P16 twin, series experiments, excess power was
observed asynchronously in series cells. That is, cells subjected to the same current from the
same source and monitored in a multiplexed manner to the same electronics were observed to yield
in one cell Pu while in the other Pu > 0. It is very difficult to attribute such an observation to an
artifact of the common instrumentation.
The association of apparent excess power with a set of necessary conditions for the D/Pd
system implies a degree of reproducibility. These conditions are not easy to attain, a fact which
may explain the irreproducibility of the phenomenon of excess heat. Examined separately the
three criteria may be taken as normal conditions of reacting systems (chemical or nuclear). The
criterion of loading is of a thermodynamic driving force; a measure of the activity or chemical
potential of a possible reactant species. The need to maintain loading for considerable periods of
time before the onset of excess heat suggests a mass transport constraint, possibly involving
nucleation and growth of an active region within the volume of the bulk Pd lattice. The final
requirement of large interfacial current density suggests a kinetic criterion. Because of the
intimate coupling between electron flux and the creation of adsorbed D, and a very facile equilibrium
between Dads and Dabs, current density can be viewed as the means by which absorbed D are given
the energy to undergo reaction.
As a final note, we are unable to account for the observed excess temperature by any
artifact known to us and are forced to conclude, tentatively, that the source of the excess power is
a property of the D/Pd system. Further, we cannot account for the measured excess heat by any
chemical or mechanical process with which we are familiar.
23
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support and considerable technical assistance of
the Electric Power Research Institute.
REFERENCES
1. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, “Electrochemically Induced Nuclear
Fusion of Deuterium”, J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) p. 301 and errata, 203
(1989), p. 87.
2. B. Baranowski and R. Wisniewski, Phys. Stat. Sol. 35, 593 (1969).
3. B. Baranowski, S. M. Filipek, M. Szustakowski, J. Farny and W. Woryna, J. Less-Common
Metals, 158, 347 (1990).
4. A. W. Szafranski and B. Baranowski, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 9, 435 (1972).
5. G. Bambakidis, R. J. Smith and D. A. Otterson, Phys. Rev. 177, 1044 (1969).
6. R. J. Smith and D. A. Otterson, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 31, 187 (1970).
