Elecfrochimica Acta, Vol. 34, NO. 9, pp. 1323-1326, 1989.
Printed in Great Britain.
001~4686/89 $3.00 + 0.00
Maxwell Pergamon Macmillan pk.
A SEARCH FOR THE EMISSION OF X-RAYS FROM ELECTROLYTICALLY
CHARGED P ALLADIUM-DEUTERIUM
S.M. Bennington, R.S. Sokhi, P.R. Stonadge, D.K. Ross, M.J. Benham, T.D. Beynon.
School of Physics and Space Research, University of Birmingham.
P. Whithey. I.R. Harris, J.P.G. Farr.
School of Metallurgy and Materials, University of Birmingham.

Abstract,
This paper reports on attempts to measure 21 .l keV X-rays from palladium and a
palladium-lithium alloy, electrolytically charged with deuterium. with the aim of verifying
the recent claimed observations of cold fusion in various metal-hydrogen alloys. No X-rays
were seen within the limits of sensitivity of our experiment. We can thus put an upper
limit on the number of nuclear events in our sample of 10 5 cm-%-l.

Introduction
The recent claimed observations of nuclear fusionf 11121 in various metal-hydrogen systems
when charged with deuterium has generated much excitement in recent months. We, like
many other research groups around the world, have attempted to verify these claims. The
experiment reported here is one of an intensive series that was started soon after the first
claims were published. Unlike most of the experiments reported to date, this experiment is
not looking for the primary radiation products of the nuclear reaction, neutrons, protons,
y-rays and so on, but for the X-rays produced when high energy charged particles slow
down in condensed matter. The X-rays are generated by the refilling of the K shell
electron orbits ionized by the passage of the charged particle. Since most materials are
quite transparent to their own X-rays, the detection is not particularly difficult. The 21 .l
keV X-rays produced by palladium can also easily penetrate the electrolyte and cell wall
between the palladium cathode and the detector.
The problem with looking for the primary radiation products from cold fusion is that it
presupposes knowledge of which reaction is actually occuring. Whilst this work is at the
verification stage a technique such as the present, which is sensitive to all nuclear events,
is more useful. Any nuclear event depositing its energy in the lattice will in theory
produce X-rays. There has been much discussion of the discrepancy between the small
numbers of neutrons apparently being produced (typically 0.6 s-lcrn-s)[~~ and the large
heat output observed in some of the calormetric experiments. The discrepancy is of the
order of 10 s fewer neutrons than would be expected. Several exotic aneutronic reactions
have been proposed to account for this, including:
01 + 24 MeV[31[41,
so-called Mossbauer fusion- d + d q
where the excess energy is absorbed by the lattice; the sLi + d +
20 + 24 MeV reaction[s], due to Li being incorporated into the lattice electrolytically
along with the deuterium. Others have proposed mechanisms whereby the d + d + t + p
channel dominates over the d + d + JHe + n channel, both are equally likely in normal
d + d fusion[sl. If the reaction is largely aneutronic then the only practical way to
measure the energy deposited in the lattice is by measuring the X-ray flux. The large
heat generation, if nuclear in origin rather than being chemical or an artefact of the
calibration of the calormetric experiment, would imply that the X-ray flux should be very
large.
This short paper discusses preliminary results from two sets of experiments. One set was
similiar to the arrangement used by Fleischmann and Pons; a palladium cathode in a
Li/D,O electrolyte. The other set was designed to see if the reaction was in fact 6Li + d
rather than the d + d reaction. Here a Li/Pd alloy cathode was used in an electrolyte
enriched with 6Li.
1323
1324 S. M. BENNINGTON et al.
Exoerimental Details
The electrolytic cell used in these experiments was designed to bring the active
cathode as close to the detector as is reasonably possible. The 21.1 keV X-rays produced
by the KCY electrons in palladium are quite penetrating and so this was easily achieved
without having to sacrifice all the electrochemical niceties. The cell design is shown in
figure 1. The cathode is mounted on a screw-threaded stud so that it can be carefully
positioned less than a millimetre from a thin Mylar window. The detector can then be
placed on the other side of this window so that only a small amount of electrolyte and
Mylar separate it from the possible source. The electrolyte was pumped past the electrodes
using a peristaltic pump to prevent hydrogen bubbles trapped between the cathode and the
window inhibiting the normal charging process.
TO
Peristaltic
Pump
t
mylar Window
Electrode
athode
Lithium Drifted
Silicon Detector
Figure I: The thin walled electrolytic cell used to look for X-rays from
palladium and palladium-lithium alloys when electrolytically charged with
deuterium .
Since the effect may well be associated with the surface rather than the bulk, we forced
the cathode to charge from its front face by painting the rear side with an inert resin
(Lacomit). The anode used was a platinum wire mounted to the rear of the cathode. A
palladium wire was used as a reference electrode with the aim of measuring the change in
cell voltage as the palladium charged.
As has already been explained, two types of experiment were attempted. The
FleischmannIPons style experiments used a pure palladium cathode in a O.lM solution of
Li dissolved in 99.8% purity D a0. The second set used a Li/Pd alloy for the cathode in
a O.lM solution of sLiOH in D r0. The alloy was made by rolling a sandwich of the two
metals (with lithium as the meat), and heating to 8OOoC to allow the lithium to diffuse
into the palladium. X-ray diffraction later showed the material to be single phase. Both of
the cathodes were then rolled into discs about 1.5mm thick and 20mm in diameter. Before
electrolysis began the discs where heated in a vacuum to remove any adsorbed gases and
were then vacuum annealed at 6OOeC overnight. Lastly the surfaces were prepared by
etching in nitric acid just prior to electrolysis. The detector used was a lithium-drifted
silicon detector which had been calibrated using various known X-ray sources.
X-rays from electrolytically charged W-D 1325
lb 2b 3b Energy (keV)
Figure 2: A caiibrarion run using a ISOnCi (Y source fixed to the buck of
a palladium foil. The KLY and Kfi lines of palladium can clearly be seen. The
extra peaks at lower energies are the L shell x-rays from neptunium in the
americium decay chain.
Results and Discussion
Several experlments were performed using current densities of about 150 mAcm-2 and
a driving voltage between anode and cathode of 15-20V. Each sample was run for 4ghrs
or more. Backgrounds were taken with an inactive cell and without the cell present.
Background levels are extremely low. Most of it is caused by background -y-rays which
have been Compton scattered to low energies. In all the background and experimental
runs, a small peak can be seen at
low
Energy (keV)
Figure 3 a) Background run with an inactive
from a palladium cathode being charged with u current
Both show a small peak at 5.8 keV which is probably
activity in the aluminium collimator.
energies. This is probably due to previously induced
collimator used on the detector and is certainly nothing to
cell present. b) Spectrum
density of 150 mA cm-z.
due to previously induced
activity in the aluminium
do with the cell or the
palladium. In the calibration run performed with a 1SOnCi (5.55 kBq) lsrAm cu source
placed against the rear of the O.lmm palladium foil which was itself placed against the
detector, palladium X-rays can be seen without difficulty (Figure 2).
The self absorption of palladium X-rays in palladium can be calculated using tabulated
data for the photo absorption cross section[al. For example the intensity falls by a factor
e in a distance d=S4ym. This ls enough to be able to see well into the bulk of the
palladium. Theoretically we could have used much thinner cathodes without significant loss
in the numbers of X-rays reaching the detector. However, it was still necessary to use a
thick foil to minimize the distortion that occurs when Pd foils are charged with deuterium.
The absorption of 21 .l keV X-rays in the intervening Mylar, heavy water and air can be
calculated in the same way to be about 6%. This is negligible compared with the
absorption in the palladium.
1326 S. M. BENNINGTON et d.
The yield of X-rays at the detector per charged particle slowing down in a foil of
thickness w can be calculated from
Y=N~-raytCabs(d/w)(Z-e -w/d) efl
where N is the number density of palladium atoms and c-x-ray is the cross-section for
X-ray emission (of the order 2-8 barns for the particles and energies proposed to result
from cold fusion[s]). t is the distance over which slowing down occurs and Cabs is an
absorption correction factor which takes into account absorption in the D ,O and Mylar.
The (dlw)(Z-e-w/d) term is the integrated probability for X-ray escape from the foil
assuming a uniform X-ray production rate. E is the efficiency for the detection of the
characteristic X-rays of palladium and is close to 100% and il is the solid angle subtended
by the detector at the foil. For a 1.5mm foil and our cell geometry and the proposed
reaction products, Y typically has a value of lo- s X-rays detected per particle. This is in
excellent agreement with the value obtained from the calibration measurements (figure 2).
In none of the runs was it possible to see a peak at 21.1 keV. Assuming Poisson
statistics, an upper limit for the number of X-rays detected was 0.14 s-1 which is
equivalent to lo4 nuclear events in our sample or approximately lo5 events cm’3s’1.
Our sensitivity for X-ray detection is comparable to that reported by other groups[r] for
neutron detection. However, X-ray detection has the advantage of also recording the
aneutronic reactions already mentioned. The nuclear reaction rate reported above ls quite
inconsistent with the large heat production reported by Fleischmann and Pons[l I.
Other groups have attempted similiar measurements, but no one has yet reported seeing
X-rays from electrolytically charged hydrogen-metal systemsl 71.

Conclusion
The lack of significant numbers of palladium X-rays indicates that no appreciable
amount of nuclear fusion of any kind is occurring in our experiments, certainly not to the
levels that would be necessary to account for the heating seen in some of the calorimetric
experiments. Even the levels of neutrons reported[l] should produce measurable numbers
of X-rays from the other products of the reaction. We should stress, however, that this
does not rule out the possibility that cold fusion exists. It only shows that we did not
observe it in our particular experimental arrangement.
Acknowledeements
We would like to thank B. Hale and J. Pate1 for their help in the design and
construction of the cell and K. Mauger for the swift preparation of the diagram.
References
[l] M. Flelschmann .S. Pons & M. Hawkins J. Electroanal. Chem. 261, 301-308 (1989).
[2] S.E. Jones Nature 338 737-740 (1989).
[3] P.L. Hagelstein, ‘A simple model for coherent Deuterium-Deuterium fusion in the
presence of a lattice.” Workshop on Cold Fusion Santa Fe, May 1989.
[4] Jaime Keller “Lattice allowed 4He formation in D-D fusion.“, Workshop on Cold
Fusion, Santa Fe, May 1989.
[S] G.S. Collins. J.W. Norbury,G.E. Tripard and J. E. Walker ‘Deuteron tunnelling at
electron-volt energies.‘*, Workshop on Cold Fusion, Santa Fe. May 1989.
[6] Yeong E. Kim “New cold nuclear fusion theory and experimental tests.“, Workshop
on Cold Fusion, Santa Fe, May 1989.
[7] R. Fleming, F. Donahu, S. Mancini. G. Knoll and B. Heuser. “An attempt to
measure characteristic x-rays from cold fusion.**, Workshop on Cold Fusion, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, May 23 1989.
[S] E. Storm and H.I. Israel, Nuclear Data Tables A7 565-681 (1970)
[9] R.K. Gardener and T.J. Gray Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 21, 515-536
(1978)
