IL NUOVO CIMENTO VOL. 15 D, N. 11 Novembre 1993
Study of Deuterium Charging in Palladium by the Electrolysis
of Heavy Water: Heat Excess Production.
L. BERTALOT(2), F. DE MARCO(2), A. DE NINNO(1), A. LA BARBERA(3)
F. SCARAMUZZI(1), V. VIOLANTE (2) and P. ZEPPA(4)
(1) ENEA, Dipartimento Innovazione, Settore Elettroottica e Laser
Centro Ricerche Energia Frascati - C.P. 65, 00044 Frascati~ Romc~ Italia
(2) Associazione EURATOM-ENEA sulla Fusione, Centro Ricerche Energia Frascati
C.P. 65, 00044 Frascati, Romo, Italia
(3) ENEA/ INN/NUMA,  Centro Ricerche Energia - Casaccia, Italia
(4) ENEA/DISP/ASC, Centro Ricerche Energia - Casaccia, Italia
(ricevuto il 6 Agosto 1993; approvato il 13 Settembre 1993)
Summary. - -  An experiment based on the electrolysis of heavy water with a
palladium cathode is reported. The production of excess power during the
electrolysis has been measured with the help of a quite accurate and reliable
calorimeter. The correlation of the detected power excess with some meaningful
parameters of the experiment is investigated. Some of the features of the
experiment permit to investigate the dynamics of deuterium in the palladium
lattice, which is thought of as the basic phenomenon for excess power production.
PACS 66.30 - Diffusion in solids.
1.  - I n t r o d u c t i o n .
In the last four years many experiments have been performed in the field
conventionally known as ,,cold fusion,,, with results that are not easily reproduced
and that are not easily explainable in the light of established knowledge, both in solid
state and in nuclear sciences. A thorough review of the experiments, both positive
and negative, and of the proposed theories has been published quite recently by
Storms [1].
There have been numerous reports of excess power production over power input
during the electrolysis of heavy water with a palladium cathode. This type of
experiment was first performed by Fleischmann and Pons in 1989 [2]. One of the few
features that have become clear in these years is the relation between the power
excess production and the amount of deuterium absorbed by the cathode, called in the
following D / P d  ratio (atomic): no effects are seen if the D / P d  ratio is lower than 0.8.
This suggests that a new class of phenomena might take place in the palladium lattice
when the amount of absorbed deuterium exceeds this value.
1435
1436 L. BERTALOT, F. DE MARCO, A. DE NINNO, ETC.
The experiment described here had as a primary goal the testing of the production
of excess heat: this task has been accomplished with positive results. Furthermore,
we devised for the electrolysis a novel approach, which seems a very promising
method for investigating the mechanism regulating the transport of deuterium in the
palladium lattice, which, in our opinion, is at the core of this class of phenomena. This
allowed us to demonstrate the correlation between excess power and some
parameters of the physical system, presumably related to the D/Pd ratio.
A model, proposed by two of us (ADN and VV), successfully interprets the
results of the experiment in terms of deuterium motion in the palladium lattice: it will
be presented for publication.
Preliminary reports on both the experiment and the model have been presented at
a specialized conference [3].
2. - T h e  e l e c t r o l y s i s .
A peculiarity of this class of experiments, designed to detect power excess, is the
high level of current densities: hundreds of mA/cm 2 are passed through the cell,
which is one to two orders of magnitude higher than in the electrolysis used normally
to study the kinetics of hydrogen-electrode reactions. Besides this, three main
features characterize this experiment.
A group from Osaka University has claimed that higher D / P d  ratios can be
obtained if low-current periods are alternated with high-current ones of the same
time duration (,,hi-lo,, technique): a semi-period of 6 hours was used [4]. We have
adopted this technique, and have investigated the influence of the period on the
power excess production.
A particular geometry was adopted: the cathode is immersed on one side in the
electrolytic solution, while the other side faces a vacuum-tight region into which
gaseous D2 (or H2) is introduced. Measuring the pressure variation of the gas in this
region, at constant volume and temperature, provides information on its permeation
through the cathode, thought of as a membrane.
Experiments designed to detect power excess normally have long durations, up
to weeks, or even months. For such long times, a typical feature that can influence
the experiment is the poisoning of the cathode surface, due to the continuous
deposition, through electrolysis, of substances contained in the solution, or dissolved
from the cell walls, or even the metal constituting the anode (usually platinum): this
renders the absorption of deuterium in the cathode more and more inefficient,
preventing high D / P d  ratios, and thus eventually ,,shutting down,~ the phenomenon
under observation. In order to overcome this problem, a palladium anode has been
used. The palladium anode is slowly but continuously dissolved in the electrolyte, and
conversely palladium is deposited on the cathode surface, thus regenerating it,
creating new active sites for the absorpion of deuterium.
A schematic drawing of the electrolytic cell is shown in fig. 1. In order to minimize
poisoning effects, the only materials in contact with the electrolyte are Pyrex glass
and Teflon. An L-shaped glass pipe is immersed in the liquid and ends with the
cathode, which is held in its position through a vacuum-tight connection obtained
with the help of an O-ring and a teflon support; in this way one side of the cathode is
STUDY OF DEUTERIUM CHARGING IN PALLADIUM ETC. 1437
Fig. 1. - Schematic drawing of the apparatus. The electrolytic cell consists of the cathode (a) and
the anode (b), rigidly held by the Teflon support (c), which also allows a vacuum-tight connection
of the cathode to the glass pipe (d) through the O-ring (e). In the glass coil (f), with inlet (g) and
outlet (h), water at constant temperature and constant flow is circulated. The measurement of AT
between g and h permits to evaluate the power excess produced.
immersed in the electrolyte, while the other one faces the inside of the glass pipe. The
latter can be filled with deuterium gas at a selected pressure, and then the pressure
can be monitored at constant volume and temperature, procuring in this way a
measurement of the deuterium permeation through the cathode in both directions.
The anode, of palladium as well, is rigidly held parallel to the cathode, at a distance of
3 ram, by the same Teflon support holding the cathode. In the experiments reported
here circular plane electrodes were used, with size of 1 and 2 cm 2 and thickness of,
respectively, 0.25 and 0.5 ram. For the electrical connections, nickel wires, coated by
Teflon, were used. A solution of LiOD (0.1 M) in heavy water was the electrolyte; for
the control experiment, it was LiOH (0.1 M) in light water.
The electrodes [5] were subjected to a pretreatment before operation: they were
heated at a temperature of 900 ~ still far from annealing, and then rapidly quenched
at liquid-nitrogen temperature. All these operations, and the mounting of the
electrodes in the cell were performed in a controlled atmosphere of argon in a
glove-box. Samples of palladium observed with an electron microscope before the
electrolysis showed a structure in grains, with the average linear dimension of grains
of about 20 ~m.
The electric current was fed by a constant current generator. Due to the
high values of the current used in the experiments, bubbles of gas (D2 and
02) are continuously formed, producing oscillations in the applied voltage. The
measurement of the voltage, necessary for the calorimetric evaluations, was
performed through an integrating RC circuit, with a time constant of ~ 20s,
1438 L. BERTALOT, F. DE MARCO, A. DE NINNO, ETC.
a time long with respect to the dynamics of bubbles in the liquid, and short
with respect to the thermal equilibrium time of the thermodynamic system.
3. - C a l o r i m e t r y .
Calorimetry consists in comparing the power input with the power output in a
thermodynamic system: an excess power is detected when the latter is higher than
the former. The power produced in the electrolytic cell, due both to the imposed
power input (electrolysis) or to any other cause inside the cell, produces a
temperature increase of the cell. The measurement of the temperature rise permits to
evaluate the power output. In order to obtain a linear response of the system, in this
experiment we chose parameters and procedures such as to minimize the
temperature difference between the cell and the environment, while maintaining
high calorimeter sensitivity. The main feature consists of the ,,flow,, configuration of
the calorimeter. A glass pipe shaped as a coil is immersed in the cell (see fig. 1) and
water at constant temperature (25 + 0.1)~ and constant mass flow (less than
1 cm3/s) is passed through it, extracting heat from the electrolyte. Note that the
symmetry of the heat exchanger guarantees that heat is extracted independently of
the point at which it is produced. Moreover, by using an appropriate mass flow, it is
possible to obtain a quite small rise of the cell temperature (in our case 1W
corresponds to = 0.15 ~ The temperature difference between water inlet and outlet
is proportional to the power output, and is measured by a thermocouple used in
differential mode: this assures for the measurement a substantial independence from
the temperature fluctuations of flowing water. In order to minimize the heat losses to
the environment, the cell was thermally insulated from the room, with a 20 cm thick
polyethylene layer, and the room temperature was kept constant at (25 + 1)~
Under these conditions a calibration of the calorimeter was performed, either
producing Joule dissipation in an electric heater immersed in the electrolyte, or
passing a current through a control electrolyte. The linearity of the calibration curve,
expressing the measured AT as a function of the power input W, confirmed that all
the above conditions were satisfied: the linearity was satisfactory up to 25 W, which
140
120
100
8O
6O
4O
2O
O-b
q-
~ , i , i ' 1 ' 6  ' 2 '  ' i 0 4 8 12 0 24
power (W)
Fig. 2. - The calibration curve of the calorimeter. The voltage V reported is the output of the
differential thermocouple, and thus gives AT, the difference in temperature between points h and
g (see fig. 1). Squares represent measurements in light water, crosses in heavy water: 1 ~
corresponds to 39 ~V.
STUDY OF DEUTERIUM CHARGING IN PALLADIUM ETC. 1439
is much higher than the power reached in the experiments, and is shown in fig. 2. The
error in the power measurement was of _+ 50 roW, mostly due to the accuracy of the
thermocouples.
Two additional checks were made. The temperature difference between a point in
the cell and the water inlet temperature was monitored, and showed values in
agreement with the main AT measurement. An electric heater was placed in the cell,
not far from the electrodes, and was used during the electrolysis, from time to time,
to check, by producing an additional power inlet, that the calorimeter was working
correctly.
The power inlet due to electrolysis was calculated by multiplying the current by
the voltage across the cell decreased by 1.54 V, thus taking into account the work
done by the current to dissociate the heavy-water molecule. A flowmeter confLrmed
that the amount of gas evolving from the cell was consistent with the electric charge
passed.
The temperatures were measured by thermocouples, whose reading was
monitored by nanovoltmeters, connected to a PC-based data acquisition system. The
pressure on the gas side of the cathode was measured with a strain gauge device and
then recorded. The voltage across the cell was measured across an RC circuit, as
mentioned above, and also recorded.
4.  - R e s u l t s .
The experiment consisted in four runs, each lasting more than 10 days: three with
heavy water, and one (control) with light water. In all three runs with heavy water
we detected the production of excess power. No excess power was measured in the
control light-water run. Run no. 1 served also to test the various technical aspects of
the measurement: thus, experimental procedures were changed while running it. For
this reason, we will not refer to it in the following, even though we were able to
detect the production of excess power. During the three positive runs we tried to
correlate the excess power with meaningful parameters of the experiment, as
discussed below. In doing this, it happened that for extended periods of time no
excess power was produced, while in other extended periods a significant amount of
excess power could be detected. In both conditions we systematically checked the
behaviour of the calorimeter, by adding extra power to the cell and measuring the
corresponding increase in temperature. These results seem to us very convincing
proof of the reliability of the experimental system. The maximum excess power
measured amounted to ~ 3W (60W/cm 3) for both low and high currents: this
corresponds to = 10 times the power input at low currents, and to doubling of the
power input at high currents.
We tried to study the dependence of the excess power produced on the following
parameters:
a) the period of the hi-lo sequence,
b) the voltage across the cell,
c) the pressure variation on the gas side.
(We found no correlation between current density and excess power.) The results
were as follows.
1440 L. BERTALOT, F. DE MARCO, h. DE NINNO, ETC.
2
q)
r
Q9
.
o
high current: 400 ~A (Pi,=10.2 W)
low current: 100 mA (Pin=l.6 W)
160 mA (2.6 W) 190 mA (3.3 W)
40 mA (0.28 W) W) 40 mA (0.28
I
7-
~ _ _ L _ _ _ . . _ x _ _
12o 16o 200 240 280 320 360
time (h)
Fig. 3. - The power excess measured during run no. 2 as a function of time. The influence of the
period of the hi-lo procedure is investigated. The peak shown at the end of the graph is the
maximum power excess measured, i.e. 3 W (the same for low-current and high-current modes),
which lasted almost 20 hours.
a) Dependence on the period. The range investigated was 5000-20000 s: the
lower limit was imposed by the thermal relaxation time of the system, about 20 rain.
In fig. 3, referring to run no. 2, which lasted more than 500 hours, the excess power is
reported as a function of time, for a large part of the run. In the first 120 hours, not
shown in the figure, the period was of 20 000 s, and no excess power was detected. In
the last 150 hours, also not shown in the figure, the period was 9000 s and no excess
power was detected. After the run, we found that the anode showed macroscopic
holes in its body, which altered the electric-field configuration in the cell: this
presumably produced the ,~shutting-down~ of the observed phenomenon in the last
part of the run. The observed holes are attributed to the continuous transfer of
palladium from anode to cathode during the electrolysis. Even though it is difficult to
establish a quantitative correlation between the period and the excess power, it
seems reasonable to infer from the data presented here that shorter periods are more
effective in producing the phenomenon.
The last peak shown in the figure is the maximum excess power measured, quoted
above: note that it lasted about 20 hours.
b) Dependence on the voltage. An accurate determination of the electrolysis'
parameters would require the measurement of the cathode's potential, i.e. the
potential measured with respect to a reference electrode. We did not have a reference
electrode, and thus we could only measure the difference of potential between the
two electrodes (which in the following we will call ,~the potentially), while a constant
current was passing through the system. In fig. 4 data from run no. 3 are reported. In
this run we purposely changed the current intensity by steps, and the values of the
difference of potential between the electrodes are shown in fig. 4a) and b), respectively
for the high-current mode and the low-current one, as a function of time. Note that in
the first half of the run we increased the current in four steps, and then we decreased
STUDY OF DEUTERIUM CHARGING IN PALLADIUM ETC. 1441
25
2O
>S
15
,~ 10
5
I I I I I I I I I
10
8
6
4
2
0
b)
0.8
0.6
~ 0.4
~ ~ 0 . 2
c)
10.5
7.5
5.0
2.5
d)
0 50 100 150 200 250 0 50 100 150 200 250
time (h)
Fig. 4. - Run no. 3. During the run the current has been increased in four steps, and then
decreased in the same four steps. The values were (a) and c) refer to the high-current mode,
b) and d) to the low-current one): 7-50, 50-200, 150-350, 200-600mA/cm 2. In a) and b) the
voltage across the cell is plotted vs .  time. In c) and d) the corresponding relative power excess is
shown. The hV's represent the difference between the voltage during the stepping up and that
during the stepping down of current, the latter with a substantial absence of power excess: this
quantity in the text has been called by convention ,,the overpotential,.
it, running along the same steps. In fig. 4c) and d) the corresponding values of the
power excess are reported on the same time scale. In this experiment a large power
excess was measured in the first part of the run; then, a failure of the low-current
generator had the effect of strongly decreasing the power excess, which never came
back to the previous value. The dashed lines drawn on fig. 4a) and b) show that in the
first part of the run, when excess power was detected, the potential across the cell,
for the same current, was higher than in the second part, when no excess power was
detected. The difference between the two measurements, that we define the
,,overpotential,, ranges from about 10% to about 50% of the value measured in the
absence of power excess. Thus, it is possible to state that there is a clear connection
between the overpotential and the production of power excess.
c) Dependence on pressure variation in the gas. In fig. 5 we report data from
run no. 3, the same run as fig. 4. In order to investigate the flow of deuterium gas
through the cathode, the pressure in the gas volume behind the cathode is
continuously monitored, keeping both volume and temperature substantially
constant. The flow can then be easily evaluated using the ideal gas law. In fig. 5 the
time derivative of the pressure, expressed as the number of deuterium atoms
crossing the cathode surface per unit time, is plotted as a function of time: the
negative sign of the flow indicates that deuterium gas is flowing into the cathode.
Two characteristic regions of the run are shown: in fig. 5a) at the beginning of the
run, and in fig. 5b) at the end of it. In the same graphs the corresponding power
excess is shown. The correlation between power excess and permeation of deuterium
95 - l l  Nuovo Cimento D
1442 L. BERTALOT, F. DE MARCO, A. DE NINNO, ETC.
0.4
0 . 2  84
a0
-0.2
-0.4
0
a)
.
i i i
10 20 30 40
time (h)
1.0
0.5
0
-0.5
-1.01 ,
200
b)
I I I | I I i i ;
210 220 230 240 250
time (h)
Fig. 5. - Run no. 3 again. The fwst 50 hours (a)) and the last ones (b)) are reported. The time
derivative of the pressure is shown as a function of time, and is expressed as the number of atoms
per second crossing the cathode (squares): the negative sign means that deuterium is entering
the cathode from the gas side. On the same graphs the power excess is reported (dots). The two
graphs show a very different behaviour in the two instances: in the presence of a significant
power excess (a)) and when power excess is absent (b)).
gas into the cathode is clear: when power excess is produced, there is a clearly
measurable flow of deuterium into the cathode.
5. - C o n c l u s i o n s .
The experiment described here has confLrmed the production of heat excess in an
electrolytic cell with heavy water and a palladium cathode, using an accurate and
reliable calorimetric measurement. The geometry used in the cell, in particular the
possibility of measuring the permeation of deuterium gas through the cathode during
the electrolysis, represents a step forward in the study of this class of phenomena. It
permits to investigate the dynamics of deuterium atoms in the palladium lattice,
which seems to be a promising means for understanding the physics of high-
concentration metal hydrides.
Two of us (ADN and VV) have developed a model, designed to interpret the
movement of deuterium atoms in the palladium lattice as matter waves, and studied
superposition and interference phenomena of the waves. The model yields results
that fit quite well some of the features of the experiment. A paper on this subject will
be submitted for publication.
The authors are grateful fo Messrs D. Lecca, G. LoUobattista and F. Marini for
their skilled cooperation in the construction of the apparatus and in the execution of
the measurements.
STUDY OF DEUTERIUM CHARGING IN PALLADIUM ETC. 1443
R E F E R E N C E S
[1] E. STORMS: Fusion Technol., 20, 433 (1991).
[2] M. FLEISCHMANN and S. PONS: J. ElectroanaL Chem., 261, 301 (1989).
[3] L. BERTALOT, F. DE MARCO, A. DE NINNO, A. LA BARBERA, F. SCARAMUZZI, V. VIOLANTE
and P. ZEPPA: Study of deuterium charging in palladium by the electrolysis of heavy water:
search for heat excess and nuclear ashes, in Proceedings of the III International Conference
on Cold Fusio~ Nagoy~ October 21-25, 1992 (Frontieres of Cold Fusion, University
Academy Press, Inc., Tokyo, 1993), p. 365; A. DE NINNO and V. VIOLANTE: Quasi-plasma
trasport model in deuterium overloaded palladium cathodes, in Proceedings of the III
International Conference on Cold Fusion, Nagoya, October 21-25, 1992 (Frontieres of Cold
Fusion, University Academy Press, Inc., Tokyo, 1993), p. 107.
[4] A. TAKAHASHI, A. MEGA, T. TAKEUCHI, H. MIYAMARU and T. IIDA: Anomalous excess heat
by D 20/Pd cell under L-H mode electrolysis, in Proceedings of the III International
Conference on Cold Fusion~ Nagoya, October 21-25, 1992 (Frontieres of Cold Fusion,
University Academy Press, Inc., Tokyo, 1993), p. 79.
[5] Johnson Matthey: Materials Technology U.K., Grade 1 Palladium foil.
