Raj, P., et al., Search for Nuclear Fusion in Gas Phase Deuteriding of Titanium Metal, in BARC Studies in
Cold Fusion, P.K. Iyengar and M. Srinivasan, Editors. 1989, Atomic Energy Commission: Bombay. p. B 1.
SEARCH FOR NUCLEAR FUSION IN GAS PHASE
DEUTERIDING OF TITANIUM METAL
P. Raj*, P. Suryanarayana*, A. Sathyamoorthy*, and T. Datta‡
* Chemistry Division
‡ Radiochemistry Division.

Introduction
The possibility of D-D nuclear fusion in some deuterium-metal systems, under ambient
conditions, has aroused feverish worldwide interest. Most of the work reported, so far,
concerns deuterium charging of Pd metal through electrolysis of D2O.
In the Chemistry Division, we have carried out some experiments on the deuteriding
behaviour of Ti metal, through gaseous route, in the absorption as well as desorption
modes, with the view to look for the fusion products, neutrons in the present case. These
kinds of experiments have been reported by Frascatti Group in Italy1. These authors
detected neutron emission lasting over a period of several hours.
Experiments
The experimental arrangement for deuteriding Ti metal is shown in Fig. 1, which is
self-explanatory. This set up has been routinely used for high pressure hydriding studies
on several systems, reported by us2-4. In some of the experiments reported here,
deuterium pressure was cycled between high and low values by simply changing the
temperature of the cell housing the sample. Most of the experiments were done in the
desorption mode. Ti metal pieces (cut from a sheet) were surface cleaned and subjected
to activation treatment before D2 loading and subsequent desorption treatment etc.
The neutron counting set up consists of an array of 24 He3 counters arranged in a well
like geometry. These counters (each 50 cm in length 2.5 cm in diameter and filled with
He3 at 4 atm.) housed in paraffin moderators, are all connected in parallel to a single pre-
amplifier. The counting efficiency of this system was found to be ≈10%. The counts are
recorded in 8192 channel multi-scalers. In the experiments reported here dwell time of 40
sec. was fixed, so that each point in Fig. 2(a) to (d) represents the number of counts per
40 sec. The background counts collected for about 10 days, before the start of these
deuteriding experiments, was found to be quite steady 60 counts/ 40 secs. This
background count rate continues to be the same well after our experiments.
Results
In the first set of experiments, starting from 3rd June 1989, after activating Ti metal
pieces, D2 gas was contacted with the sample at a pressure ~10 atm. while keeping the
sample at low temperature (~77K). After a soaking time of ~20 min., sample temperature
was raised gradually, while simultaneous evacuation was started. Within about 15 min.
the neutron counter registered an increase in count rate reaching a max. 3900 (as
compared to background counts of ~60), see Fig. 2(a). On withdrawing the reactor from
the counting well, a considerable reduction in the counts was observed. On re-introducing
the reactor after background counts are restored, an additional peak like structure was
observed. Although the evacuation was continued, no further increase in count rate over
the background could be observed over the next twenty hours.
The next experiment on the same charge was carried out by repeating the conditions of
the first experiment. The results of this experiment, dated 4th June 1989, are shown in
Fig. 2(b). Again two peak like structures, each lasting for about 30 min. and separated by
50 min. were seen. However, the intensities of both these structures are greatly reduced,
as compared to the first experiment (3rd June 1989), the max. counts being ~700.
In the third experiment, with the same charge of Ti pieces, D2 gas pressure was made to
cycle between ~50 atm. to ~13 atm. by changing the reactor temperature from room
temperature to 77 K. In this case large changes in counts, as a function of time were
noticed. An increasing trend of counts initiated at ~2330 hrs on 4th June 1989 lasted for
almost 7 hrs. with an estimated integral counts ~6.5×105. Even after this long bursts like
structures, some additional peaks were observed on 5th June 1989. With no further
structures observed over the next few hours, desorption was carried out after loading the
sample with D2 gas with the sample temperature at ~77K. By raising sample temperature
gradually, while simultaneously evacuating, a much bigger structure lasting for ~2 hrs.
(from ~1830 to 2030 hrs. on 7th June 1989) was seen Fig. 2(c). An approximate estimate
of integrated count over this period is 7×105. Further experiments with this charge,
involving D2 loading followed by prolonged periods of evacuation at temperature up to a
max. of ~200°C, did not show further structures.
A second series of similar experiments on a fresh charge of Ti from the same source
did not exhibit exactly similar behaviour, as found for the first charge. However, one set
of experiments on 17th June 1989 see Fig. 2(d) involving pressure cycling, followed by
evacuation, exhibited increase in count rate lasting over a period of ~100 min. In this
case, the scatter in the counts was found to be rather large and maximum counts up to
105/ 40 s were observed, as compared to background count of ~60/ 40 sec. This charge
showed no further increase in count rate even after various treatments.
Further experiments are planned — (i) to study all possible parameters relating to the
observed increase in the count rates, (ii) to identify the source of these extra counts, and
(iii) to investigate the energy and time structure of the radiation responsible for the
observed peak like structures.
Acknowledgement
The authors are indebted to Dr. R.M. Iyer, Director, Chemical group and Dr. J.P.
Mittal, Head, Chemistry Division for helpful discussions and encouragement. Sincere
thanks are due to Dr. P.R. Natarajan, Head, Radiochemistry Division; Dr. H.K.
Sadhukhan, Head, Heavy Water Division; Dr. C.K. Gupta, Head, Metallurgy Division
and their colleagues for providing neutron counting facility, Deuterium gas and Titanium
metal, respectively.
References
1. A. De Ninno et al, Europhysics Letters 9, 221 (1989).
2. P. Raj, A. Sathyamoorthy, P. Suryanarayana and R.M. Iyer, J. Less—Common
Metals 123, 145 (1986).
3. P. Raj, A. Sathyamoorthy, P. Suryanarayana, A.J. Singh and R.M. Iyer, Less-
Common Metals 130, 139 (1987).
4. P. Raj, P. Suryanarayana, A. Sathyamoorthy and R.M. Iyer, Mat. Res. Bull. 24(6),
717-724 (1989).
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the hydriding/dehydriding unit
Fig. 2. Desorption mode experiments
