Reifenschweiler, O., Reduced radioactivity of tritium in small titanium particles. Phys. Lett. A, 1994. 184: p. 149.
Reduced radioactivity of tritium in small titanium particles
Otto Reifenschweiler 1,2
Work carried out at the Philips Research Laboratories, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 23 November 1993; accepted for publication 7 December 1993
Communicated by A. Lagendijk
By heating a TiT0.0035 preparation consisting of extremely small monocrystalline particles
(≈ 15 nm) a decrease of the radioactivity by 40% was observed. In further experiments the
concentration of tritium in such preparations was varied (TiTx experiments) showing that the
radioactivity of the tritium increased less than proportionally to its concentration. Careful
analysis of the experiments seems to rule out the possibility of trivial errors. A provisional
hypothetical explanation is formulated. Our experiments may point to a connection with cold
DD-fusion.
Several recent publications deal with “cold fusion” of deuterons suitably absorbed in solid
matter (e.g. Pd or Ti) [1-3] and although some difference of opinion may still exist as to the
interpretation of the results, they have certainly stimulated renewed interest in the question
whether nuclear phenomena can be influenced by the atomic and electronic environment. In this
connection the author wants to report some curious results obtained many years ago in the course
of technological projects [4-8] based on the use of the hydrogen isotope tritium absorbed in
titanium [9-11]. It seems to me that it would certainly be worth repeating these experiments with up-
to-date experimental technology, but unfortunately I am no longer in a position to do this
myself.3 Hence this communication.
In our experiments the titanium preparation was made by evaporation of the metal in argon at
a suitable pressure, e.g. 0.5 to 2 cm Hg [4,6]. It was deposited as a kind of soot, consisting of
monocrystalline particles about 15 nm in diameter, arranged in chains, on the inner wall of the
measuring vessel. In fig. 2 of ref. [4] and fig. 1 of ref. [6] electron micrographs of such
preparations are shown. After the argon was pumped out the tritium was added and was
completely absorbed within a few seconds. This was confirmed by hundreds of experiments. In one
part of the experiments the electron current(β-particles and secondaries) was measured by a
vibrating reed electrometer via a cylindrical electrode placed inside the vessel. In several other
experiments there was a thin steel window to enable the x-radiation accompanying theβ-decay
(internal and external bremsstrahlung and characteristic X-rays [12]) to be measured by a GM-
tube (fig. 1). Various experiments established for both detection systems the linear relationship
between the read-out and the activity.
In one experiment [5] a TiT0.0035 preparation (48 mg Ti, 100 mC T2) is slowly heated (duration
about 10 h) in the arrangement of fig. 1 and the radioactivity is measured by the x-radiation. The
1 Retired Chief Physicist, Philips Research Laboratories.
2 Present address: Jan Sluytersweg 13, 5645 JA Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
3 A more detailed description of our experiments with proposals to improve the experimental technique can be
obtained on request from the author.
tritium which is released–if any–is pumped out continuously. Figure 2, graph A gives the count
rate as a function of temperature. The increase of tritium pressure during the heating of an
identical preparation is determined in a separate experiment in a sealed-off tube (graph B). It is
very strange that the radioactivity a decreases sharply between 115°C and 160°C by 28% followed by
a slower decrease, reaching 60% of its initial value at 275°C, and then rises steeply to the initial
value at 360°C (graph A). With further increase of temperature the count rate decreases fast due
to decomposition of the preparation and hence the loss of tritium. The first decrease of
radioactivity between 115°C and 275°C, however, cannot be explained by decomposition of the
preparation. GraphΒ shows that there is no measurable release of tritium below about 300°C
(confirmed by many experiments). But the strongest evidence that no tritium is lost at the first
decrease of radioactivity between 115°C and 275°C is the re-increase of the count rate between
275°C and 360°C.
Fig. 1. Experimental arrangement for the relative measurement of the β-activity as a function of temperature
measuring the x-radiation by a GM-tube.
Fig. 2. Graph A: Count rate as a function of temperature in the pumped system. Graph B: Tritium pressure as
a function of temperature in the closed system.
In two other experiments carried out under different conditions a similar decrease and
increase of the radioactivity with increasing temperature was observed. But there was also one
experiment with a 10 times higher concentration of tritium and a roughly 5 times faster increase
of temperature where the decrease of count rate did not occur.
To arrive at an explanation of the strange result presented in fig. 2 we proceed in the following
way: If n is the number of GM-counts per second, NT the number of tritium atoms,λ the decay
constant andαthe counting efficiency, then we have
n =αλΝT.
As was explained above, we are convinced that the decrease of n between 115°C and 275°C
cannot be caused by a decrease of NT. The counting efficiencyαcomprises the efficiency of
generation of internal and external bremsstrahlung and of characteristic X-rays by theβ-electrons of
tritium [12], the overall geometrical factor (only a very small part of the generated X-rays hit the
GM-tube) and the counting efficiency of the GM-tube. The generation of internal bremsstrahlung
is independent of external conditions and thus proportional to the number ofβ-electrons. A change
of the efficiency of generation of external bremsstrahlung, of characteristic X-rays and of the overall
geometrical factor between 115°C and 275°C would require a considerable migration of tritium,
although–as was explained above–no tritium was escaping from the titanium layer. Such a
migration seems thus impossible. The counting efficiency of the GM-tube was tested several times
and may be assumed constant during the experiment. Thus it is hard to see that the counting
efficiencyαcould change at temperatures between 115°C and 275°C. It is calculated that
α=4.2×10-9 at the beginning of the heating experiment.
So we are almost forced to assume a decrease ofλ between 115°C and 275°C during our
experiment even though no physical effect is known that brings about such a high change of
radioactivity [13].
In order to obtain further evidence for a change ofλ another series of experiments was made
at room temperature. The concentration x of the tritium was varied in a finely divided TiTx
preparation and the corresponding increase of the emission current caused by theβ-electrons of
tritium was measured (TiTx experiment). In these experiments a substantial deviation from the
expected proportionality between current i and concentration x was observed: Δi/Δx is not
constant with increasing concentration x but shows characteristic variations. In one of these
experiments 3.6 mg Ti was deposited as a finely divided preparation with particle size of about
16 nm on the inner wall of the measuring vessel (a bulb of 10 cm diameter covered inside by a
Au layer). After removing the evaporator a cylindrical electrode of 5 cm diameter and a length of
8 cm was lowered into the centre of the bulb, the system was sealed off and a negative voltage U =
-252 V was applied to the Au electrode carrying the TiTx preparation. With this voltage the i=f(U)
curve (current-voltage characteristic) was nearly horizontal. The small accurately determined
quantities of tritium were added successively and the increase of the currentΔi/Δx was measured.
By recording the tritium pressure using a special tube which measures theβ-emission of the
gaseous tritium it was ascertained that the tritium has been absorbed completely after each
addition. Figure 3 shows the result. With increasing xΔi/Δx first decreases reaching a minimum of
about 55% of its initial value at x≈3×10-4 and then increases again to the initial value at
x≈5×10-4.
Again we can write the number of the detectedβ-electrons per second n determined from the
emission current as
TNn  or ii  ,
where i is the measured current and iβtheβ-emission current.
The number of tritium atoms NT absorbed in the preparation and with itΔx and x were
carefully determined at each addition of tritium as stated above. The counting efficiencyδ contains
a possible absorption effect of theβ-electrons in the titanium and the overall geometrical factor
consisting of the loss of electrons not hitting the central electrode and the addition of
backscattered and secondary electrons from the Au backing of the TiTx preparation. The mean
thickness of the titanium preparation was determined as 25 nm, which is about the range of 1 keV
electrons [14]. Thus the absorption effect of the titanium is very small. Furthermore from several
observations a uniform distribution of the tritium in the Ti preparation is concluded, the small
absorption effect does not change during the experiment and is thus negligible. Furthermore we
cannot see any reason why the overall geometrical factor should depend on x. We thus come to a
constant counting efficiencyδ during the experiment. At the beginning of the experiment it was
determined asδ=0.89. We may thus conclude that the measured current i is proportional to the
β-emission current of the tritium in the preparation and the increase of the measured currentΔi/Δx
may be replaced by the increase of theradioactivity Δa/Δx in the preparation.
There was also an experiment in which the radioactivity was determined by the x-radiation as
in our heating experiment and where a course ofΔa/Δx=f(x) of the same kind as that shown in
fig. 3 was obtained.

So we are once more forced to the conclusion that we have to look for a decrease ofλ of the
added tritium. However, as stated above with the heating experiment such a marked change ofλ
is never observed experimentally [13] and unfortunately there is no theory that can describe such a
pronounced decrease ofλ. It may be that current theory has overlooked some effects that might
occur because of the rather special conditions: emitted electrons have to find their place among the
electrons of extremely small single crystals. But it seems unlikely that this can cause a 40%
decrease ofλ in our heating experiment and also the roughly 45% decrease ofλ of the added
tritium at the minimum of theΔa/Δx=f(x) curve.
Fig. 3. Increase of radioactivityΔα/Δ* as a function of concentration x. Evaporator removed.
Even more puzzling are the following results: In two independent experimentsΔa/Δx was
found to decrease at x≈3×10-3 to very low values of a few percent of the initial value. This
observation, however, is not quite certain because the evaporator was not removed from the
measuring vessel and could have absorbed some tritium. But during the course of these
experiments several additions of tritium were followed by a decrease of the radioactivity
(Δa/Δx<0), which even continued when all tritium was absorbed. This extremely strange
behaviour cannot be explained by absorption of tritium by the evaporator.
Under these circumstances it seems justified to put forward a highly unorthodox hypothesis,
the nuclear pair hypothesis. If we assume that tritons absorbed in the extremely small single
Ti-crystals can combine into pairs and that the decay constant of such a pair is much smaller than
that of a free triton, then the observed behaviour of all TiTx. experiments can be explained.
The author–though well aware that the experimental evidence is rather limited and that a
theoretical foundation is lacking–feels strongly attracted by this idea of nuclear pairing with
reduced radioactivity and he believes that it might have other applications. The author hopes to
come back to these questions in later publications.
It should be obvious that our results might also have a bearing on cold fusion [1-3]. As a first
step I should like to propose experiments with deuterium absorbed in preparations of finely divided
hydrogen absorbers (Ti, Pd or others) as used in our tritium experiments and at temperatures
between 100°C and the dissociation temperature.
I am grateful to Professors H.B.G. Casimir, H.L. Hagedoorn, J. Kistemaker, D. Lenstra, M.J.
Steen-land and M.J.A. de Voigt for their interest in this work and for encouraging and
stimulating discussions.
References
[1] M. Srinivasan, Curr. Sci. 60 (1991) 417.
[2] E. Storms, Fusion Technol. 20 (1991) 433.
[3] M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Phys. Lett. A 176 (1993) 118.
[4]Ο. Reifenschweiler, in: Proc. Conf. on Peaceful uses of atomic energy, vol. 19 (United
Nations, Geneva, 1958) p. 360.
[5] J.F. van de Vate, O. Reifenschweiler and G. van de Ligt, Onderzoekingen naar de
temperatuurvastheid van fijnverdeelde metaal-tritium-systemen in vacuum, Internal report, Philips
Research Laboratories (1961), unpublished.
[6] O. Reifenschweiler, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 35 (1964) 456.
[7] H. Horsier, H. Lydtin, O. Reifenschweiler and K.G. Frohner, Z. Angew. Phys. 22 (1967) 203.
[8] O. Reifenschweiler, in: Proc. 1968 Int. Conf. on Modern trends in activation analyses,
Special Publication 312, Vol. II (National Bureau of Standards, Washington, DC, 1969) p. 905.
[9] W.M. Mueller, in: Metal hydrides, eds. W.M. Mueller, J.P. Blackledge and G.G. Libowitz
(Academic Press, New York, 1968) p. 336.
[10] J.R. Morton and D.S. Stark, Trans. Faraday Soc. 56 (1960) 351.
[11] G. Alefeld and J. Volkl, eds., Hydrogen in metals, Vols. I and II, Topics in applied physics
(Springer, Berlin, 1978).
[12] D.K. Wickenden and O. Reifenschweiler, Some investigations into the bremsstrahlung of
tritium, Internal report, Philips Research Laboratories (1961), unpublished.
[13] G.T. Emery, Annu. Rev. Nucl. Sci. 22 91972) 165.
[14] J.E. Holliday and E.J. Sternglass, J. Appl. Phys. 30 (1959) 1428.
