Cecil, F.E. and G.M. Hale. Measurement of D-D and D-Li6 Nuclear Reactions at Very Low Energies. in Second
Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, "The Science of Cold Fusion". 1991. Como, Italy: Societa Italiana di Fisica,
Bologna, Italy.

MEASUREMENT OF D-D AND D-6LI NUCLEAR REACTIONS
AT VERY LOW ENERGIES

F.E. Cecila and G.M. Haleb
aColorado School of Mines, Golden CO 80401, USA
bLos Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545, USA


ABSTRACT
The nuclear reactions of very low energy deuterons (down to center-of-mass energies of 2 keV) with
deuterons and 6Li have been measured. The measured D-D reactions are in good with agreement recent R-matrix
calculations. The reaction ratios D(d,p)T/D(d,n)3He and 6Li(d,p)7Li/6Li(d,α)4He in particular were examined for
possible evidence of an Oppenheimer-Phillips type enhancement. No significant enhancement was found in either
ratio or in the absolute yields of the reactions. The radiative capture reactions D(d,γ)4He and 6Li(d,γ)8Be were
likewise measured. The branching ratios of these radiative capture reactions to the nucleonic branches of the
reactions appear roughly independent of energy. The role of these reactions in the production of heat in cold-fusion
experiments is evaluated.

INTRODUCTION
The nuclear reactions between two deuterons and perhaps between a deuteron and a 6Li nucleus are
generally accepted as playing crucial roles in recently observed nuclear processes and significant heat production in
condensed matter deuterium-metal systems. Independent measurements of the cross sections for these nuclear
reactions at low energies will allow these assumed roles to be addressed. The ratio of the reactions D(d,n)3He and
D(d,p)T or the ratio of the reactions D(d,γ)4He and D(d,p)T at very low energies will, for example, determine
whether significant heat production is possible from D-D nuclear reactions in the absence of enormous quantities of
escaping and potentially hazardous radiation. Similarly, the ratio of the reactions 6Li(d,p)7Li and 6Li(d,α)4He and the
ratio of the reactions 6Li(d,7)8 Be and 6Li(d,α)4 He will allow the analogous determination for the D-6Li reaction to
be addressed. In this work, we report on our recent measurements of these reactions. While some of these reactions
have been studied at relatively low energies1-5, the present work extends our knowledge of these reactions to
significantly lower energies. On the other hand, our measurement of the reaction 6Li(d,γ)8 Be is the first reported
observation of this reaction.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The D-D and D-6Li reactions were studied using magnetically analyzed deuteron beams from the Colorado
School of Mines low energy charged particle accelerator6. The targets consisted of pressed sheets of CD2 and rolled
foils of metallic Li, isotopically enriched to 94% 6Li. The charged reaction products were detected with silicon
surface barrier detectors placed at 150° from the beam direction and protected from the Rutherford backscatterd
beam deuterons by a thin Al foil. The gamma rays were detected with a NaI(Tl) scintillation spectrometer
surrounded by an active Compton scattered gamma ray and cosmic ray shield. This gamma ray detector system has
been described elsewhere7. The techniques used in the gamma ray to charged particle branching ratio measurements
have likewise been described in some of our earlier studies8.
Charged particle spectra measured during the bombardment of the CD2 and 6Li targets are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. (a)Charged particle spectrum for D-D reaction at Elab = 10 keV. (b) Charged particle spectrum for D-6Li
reaction at Elab = 150 keV.
Since the angular distributions of the outgoing reaction products for the D-D and D-6Li reactions have been
shown to be nearly isotropic at low energies1-3, the reaction ratios D(d,p)T/D(d,n)3He and 6Li(d,p)7 Li/6Li(d,α)4 He
are determined directly from the ratio of the yield of the peaks labeled “3He ions” and “tritons” for the D-D reaction
and “p0” and “α” for the D-6Li reaction. The yield ratios so determined as a function of energy are given in Figure 2.
The yield ratios for the D-D reaction presented in Figure 2 are compared to a recent R-matrix9 calculation. Our
measured yield ratios are consistent with the calculated ratio, indicating no enhancement of the (d,p) reaction as
qualitatively suggested by Oppenheimer and Phillips10. While there have been no comparable calculations for the
ratio of the reactions 6Li(d,p)7Li and 6Li(d,α)4He, Koonin11 has calculated the (d,p)/(d,n) ratio for the D-6Li reactions
at low energies and has predicted no significant enhancement of the (d,p) reaction. Our results are consistent with
these predictions since we would expect the (d,α) reaction to be unaffected by any Oppenheimer-Phillips type
processes.
These spectra also allowed a determination of the absolute thick target yield of the reactions. The measured
yields are shown in Figure 3 and are compared, respectively, to yields based upon the R-matrix calculation noted
above or calculated assuming a slowly varying astrophysical S-factor. There is good agreement between measured
and calculated yields again indicating no anomalous behavior at very low energies.
Figure 2. (a) Ratio of (d,p) to (d,n) branches for D-D reactions, (b) Ratio of (d,p) to (d,α) branches for D-6Li
reactions.
Gamma ray spectra were measured during the deuteron bombardment of the CD2 and 6Li targets between
c.m. energies of 20 and 100 keV. The yield of the 23.8 MeV and 22.6 MeV gamma rays and the concurrent yield of
the charged particles (see Figs 1) will determine the gamma ray to charged particle branching ratios for the D-D and
D-6Li reactions respectively after the yield ratios are corrected for the relative detector efficiencies. The branching
ratios so determined are plotted in Figure 4. The D-D branching ratio is consistent at the higher energies with our
earlier measurements. The fact that the measurements of the D-D gamma ray to charged particle branching ratio at
c.m. energies of 20 and 40 keV are, to within errors, equal in value, suggest that the branching ratio is independent
of energy. The energy dependence for the branching ratio for the D-6Li reaction is somewhat inconclusive although
energy independence is certainly not ruled out by virtue of the relatively large error bar on the lower energy data
point for this reaction.
Figure 3. (a) Measured and calculated yields for D(d,p)T reaction, (b) Measured and calculated yields for 6Li(d,α)4
He reaction.
Figure 4. Gamma ray to charged particle branching ratios for the D-D and D-6Li reactions. The open squares are
from Ref. 4.

CONCLUSIONS
The results of our measurements have significant implications for any effort to associate the D-D or D-6Li
nuclear reactions with reports of heat production from cold fusion experiments. Specifically, if the particle-particle
and gamma ray-particle branching ratios which we have measured at very low laboratory energies are characteristic
of the branching ratios occurring in condensed matter fusion in deuterium-metal systems, then even low levels of
heat production arising from these nuclear reactions will necessarily be associated with enormous quantities of
escaping radiation. For example, based on the branching ratios given in Figures 2 and 4, if 1 Watt of power were
produced by the D-D reaction, then there would be an accompanying production of about 1012 2.5 MeV neutrons per
second and about 10s 24 MeV gamma rays per second. Comparable yields of neutrons and gamma rays will be
associated will similar levels of power production by the D-6Li reaction. If, therefore, the reported production of
heat from condensed matter fusion in deuterium-metal systems is to be attributed to D-D or D-6Li reactions, then the
particle-particle and gamma ray-particle branching ratios at unmeasurably low energies must vary drastically from
those measured at the low energies reported in this work.
This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy.

References
1. R. Brown and N. Jarmie, Phys. Rev. C41 (1990) 1391.
2. A. Krauss et al, Nucl. Phys. A465 (1987) 150.
3. A.J. Elwyn et al., Phys. Rev. C16 (1977) 1744.
4. F.J. Wilkinson and F.E. Cecil, Phys. Rev. C31 (1985) 2036.
5. C.A. Barnes et al., Phys. Lett. 197B (1987) 1922.
6. F.E. Cecil et al., NIM B40/41 (1989) 934.
7. F.E. Cecil et al., NIM A234 (1985) 479.
8. F.E. Cecil and F.J. Wilkinson, Phys. Rev. Letts. 53 (1984) 767.
9. G.M. Hale and D.C. Dodder, Proc. Int. Conf. on Nucl. Cross Sections for
Technology. Knoxville (1979) J.C. Fowler, C.H. Johnson and C.D. Bowman editors.
NBS Special Publication 594, p. 650.
10. J.R. Oppenheimer and M. Phillips, Phys. Rev. 48 (1935) 500.
11. S.E. Koonin and M. Mukerjee, Phys. Rev. C42 (1990) 1639.
