ENERGETIC CHARGED PARTICLES FROM
DEUTERIUM METAL SYSTEMS
F.E. CECIL, H. LIU AND C.S. GALOVICH
Department of Physics
Colorado School of Mines, Golden CO 80401
We report on measurements made a number of years ago of energetic charged parti-
cles which were emitted from deuterium metal systems subject to non-equilibrium
conditions of temperatures and electric currents. These measurements include (i)
thin Titanium foils deuterated at moderately high temperatures in a deuterium at-
mosphere and then monitored as they were cycled from LN2 to room temperatures;
(ii) charged particle detection of Ti foils exposed to a deuterium glow discharge;
and (iii) observation of charged particles from Ti foils following bombardment with
energetic deuterium ions.

1. Introduction
Following the initial reports in 1989 of excess heat and nuclear phenomena from
deuterium metal systems at room temperatures, we undertook a series of experi-
ments devoted to the detection of energetic charged particles from thin deuterated
metallic foils subject to a variety of non-equilibrium physical conditions. The moti-
vation for this approach was the possibility that the excess heat in the presence of a
very low associated neutron background was due to energetic charged particles from
deuteron induced nuclear reactions. We carried out three independent experimen-
tal approaches to this search. In every case very clear unambiguous observations of
charged particles, with energies up about 6 MeV were made.
2. Deuterium loaded foils
The first measurements consisted of preparing deuterated Ti foils by heating in a
deuterium atmosphere. The foils were then placed in vacuum and cooled to LN2
temperatures and allowed to slowly warm up while an electric current was passed
through the foils. Intense bursts of charged particles with energies up to about 4
MeV were seen during these warm up periods. Details of the target preparation
and these results have been published elsewhere1,2 .
3. Glow discharges
We fabricated a small glow discharge chamber with charged particle detectors view-
ing the Ti cathode during deuterium glow discharge. Details of the design and op-
erating parameters are given elsewhere1 . In Figure 1 (top) we show the spectrum
535
536
Figure 1. Top. Spectrum of 214Am calibration source with and without detector biases and
Kapton degrading foil. Bottom Spectrum of deuterium glow discharge with Ti cathode with and
without detector biases and Kapton degrading foil. The energy of the alpha particles from the
241Am source in the upper spectrum is 5.48 MeV. The energy of the group in the lower spectrum
centered at channel 670 is approximately 6.8 MeV
537
measured with a 0.1 µCurie 241Am calibration source, with and without the applied
detector bias and with and without an extra Kapton degrading foil in. The spec-
trum measured during one of the glow discharges under the same set of detector
conditions is shown in the bottom of Figure 1. The similarity between these spectra
is striking and the fact that the energy calibration of the two spectra is identical in-
dicates the production 6.8 MeV particles with an average source strength of roughly
several thousand particles per second.
4. Ion bombardment
A deuterated Ti titanium target was prepared by bombarding a Ti foil with 30
keV deuterium ions for several hours at a current of 10 µAmperes from the Col-
orado School of Mines particle accelerator3 . The spectrum measured during the
bombardment is shown in the top of Figure 2. The three particle groups are from
the d-d reactions between the beam ions and the previously implanted deuterons.
The spectrum measured following the bombardment (with the gate valve to the
accelerator closed) and with the temperature of the target at about 190 K is shown
in the bottom of Figure 2. The somewhat broadened peak at channel 100 in the
lower spectrum suggests, by comparison with the top figure, the production of 3
MeV protons.

5. Conclusions
We have obtained solid evidence, under three independent sets of experimental
circumstances, for the anomalous production of energetic charged particles from
deuterium metal systems. Further work to reproduce these results and to enhance
their repeatability is encouraged. This work was supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy and the Electric Power Research Institute.
References
1. H. Liu. “Studies of nuclear reactions d-d, d-6Li and d-10B at low energies and charged
particle emission from deuterium metal systems”. Ph. D. thesis, Colorado School of
Mines (1992) (Unpublished)
2. F.E. Cecil, H. Liu, D. Beddingfield and C.S. Galovich in “Anomalous nuclear effects
in deuterium/metal systems” AIP Conference Proceedings Vol 228; edited by Steven
Jones, Franco Scaramuzzi and David Worledge, p. 375 (1990).
3. F.E. Cecil, D. Ferg, H. Liu, B. Kriss, H. Liu and J. Scorby, ”The low energy, high
current particle accelerator at the Colorado School of Mines”, Nucl. Instrum. and
Meth. in Phys. Res., B40/41, 934 (1989).
538
Figure 2. Top. Spectrum measured during bombardment of Ti target with deuterium ion beam.
Bottom spectrum measured following deuterium ion bombardment with target at 190 K.
