38 INFINITE ENERGY  •  ISSUE 108  •  MARCH/APRIL 2013
S torms points out that cold fusion (LENR) does not pro-
duce a high energy particle as part of the final product.
There is ample experimental proof of this and I agree.
Storms includes all lattice defects as being lattice and not
potential reaction sites. I disagree. I still see lattice defects as
potential sites, particularly single atom vacancies. I do agree
that regular undisturbed lattice material is not where reac-
tions occur, even when loaded greater than 0.9 with deuteri-
um.
Storms states every system seeks the lowest Gibbs energy.
I agree completely.
Storms points to cracks as the locations of reactions. He
seems to be referring to cracks that have one small spacial
dimension and two extended spacial dimensions. I disagree.
I see two (or three) small spacial dimensions and one (or
zero) extended spacial dimensions as required to forbid typ-
ical quantum mechanical behavior and allow a classical col-
lapse of d + e + d → He + free-electron. For me, small is sig-
nificantly less than two Bohr radii, so an electron cannot
form a self-reinforcing periodic orbit.

Storms makes three assumptions. I see no experimental
evidence to tell us what the reactants or the products are for
hydrogen on nickel, nor for deuterium on nickel, so I do not
yet see a reason to have one mechanism or one site. I still
consider p(d) + Ni → Cu as possibly the channel for both
hydrogen and deuterium on nickel.
The section entitled “Proposed Mechanism Causing
LENR” is the meat of the article; much is hinted at and much
is unspecified. At the start we cannot tell if the line of pro-
tons and electrons proposed are vibrating bound particles,
like atoms in a lattice, or free moving particles with thermal
velocities that would take them out of a neat line in about
0.1 picoseconds. Storms seems to want the best of both
worlds, but does not explain how that would work.
The other feature offered is a resonance. We are not told
what is resonating, nor what is driving the resonance, nor
how they are coupled. I do not see a stable, nor quasi-stable,
resonator in the proposed line of charged particles.
Storms offers a reactants in/products out description that
in the middle requires an extravagant use of the weak force
to convert e + p → n on demand. This will require experi-
mental proof before I would accept this channel, but it is
worth keeping the idea open.
What it is that Storms finds appealing about small cracks
needs more explicit statement. I find small confines that for-
bid typical quantum mechanic behavior and allow the elec-
trostatic collapse of d + e + d → He + free-electron the most
likely mechanism for cold fusion. I do not believe that a line
of charged particles with two open dimensions can evade
quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics will lead to typi-
cal chemical behavior where an electron’s average distance
from a proton is about one Bohr radius and where two pro-
tons typically hold two Bohr radii apart by their respective
electron clouds. I believe two restricted spacial dimensions
are required. Storms seems to be offering one restricted
dimension. How this works is not obvious.
Storms is one of the world’s most capable and productive
experimentalists in cold fusion. I look forward to his experi-
mental results. I also look forward to an elaboration of his
theory.
Agreements and Disagreements with Storms
Ed Pell*
About the Author
Ed Pell has a B.S and M.S. in physics from Columbia
University focusing on experimental particle physics. He
has been in semiconductor product design, lithography
and EDA (electronic design automation).
*Email: edpell@optonline.net
❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏    ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏   ❏ ❏
