(12) INTERNATIONAL APPLICATION PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATENT COOPERATION TREATY (PCT)
(19) World Intellectual Property Organization
International Bureau
(43) International Publication Date
27 May 2010 (27.05.2010)
1111111111101101010111110101111100111111H101011111101110110111111
(10) International Publication Number
WO 2010/058288 Al
PCT
(51) International Patent Classification:
G21B 3/00 (2006.01)
(21) International Application Number:
PCT/IB2009/007549
(22) International Filing Date:
24 November 2009 (24.11.2009)
(25) Filing Language: 	 Italian
(26) Publication Language: 	 English
(30) Priority Data:
PI2008A000119 24 November 2008 (24.11.2008) 	IT
(71) Applicants: BERGOMI, Luigi [IT/IT]; Strada Petriccio-
Belriguardo, 112, 1-53100 Siena (IT). GHIDINI, Tiziano
[IT/IT]; Via Verdi, 33, 1-25057 Sale Marasino (IT).
(72) Inventor; and
(71) Applicant : PIANTELLI, Silvia; Strada Petriccio-Belri-
guardo, 120, 1-53100 Siena (SI) (IT).
(72) Inventor 	only): PIANTELLI, Francesco; Strada
Petriccio-Belriguardo, 112, 1-53100 Siena (SI) (IT).
_ (74) Agent: CELESTINO, Marco; ABM Agenzia Brevetti &
Marchi, Viale Giovanni Pisano, 31, 1-56123 Pisa (IT).
(81) Designated States (unless otherwise indicated, for every
kind of national protection available): AE, AG, AL, AM,
AO, AT, AU, AZ, BA, BB, BG, BH, BR, BW, BY, BZ,
CA, CH, CL, CN, CO, CR, CU, CZ, DE, DK, DM, DO,
DZ, EC, EE, EG, ES, FI, GB, GD, GE, GH, GM, GT,
HN, HR, HU, ID, IL, IN, IS, JP, KE, KG, KM, KN, KP,
KR, KZ, LA, LC, LK, LR, LS, LT, LU, LY, MA, MD,
ME, MG, MK, MN, MW, MX, MY, MZ, NA, NG, NI,
NO, NZ, OM, PE, PG, PH, PL, PT, RO, RS, RU, SC, SD,
SE, SG, SK, SL, SM, ST, SV, SY, TJ, TM, TN, TR, TT,
TZ, UA, UG, US, UZ, VC, VN, ZA, ZM, ZW.
(84) Designated States (unless otherwise indicated, for every
kind of regional protection available): ARIPO (BW, GH,
GM, KE, LS, MW, MZ, NA, SD, SL, SZ, TZ, UG, ZM,
ZW), Eurasian (AM, AZ, BY, KG, KZ, MD, RU, TJ,
TM), European (AT, BE, BG, CH, CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE,
ES, FI, FR, GB, GR, HR, HU, 1E, IS, IT, LT, LU, LV,
MC, MK, MT, NL, NO, PL, PT, RO, SE, SI, SK, SM,
TR), OAPI (BF, BJ, CF, CG, CI, CM, GA, GN, GQ, GW,
ML, MR, NE, SN, TD, TG).
Published:
with international search report (Art. 21(3))
before the expiration of the time limit for amending the
claims and to be republished in the event of receipt of
amendments (Rule 48.2(h))
— (54) Title: METHOD FOR PRODUCING ENERGY AND APPARATUS THEREFOR

(57) Abstract: A method and a generator to produce energy from nuclear reactions between hydrogen and a metal, comprising the
steps of a) production of a determined quantity of micro/nanometric clusters of a transition metal, b) bringing hydrogen into con-
tact with said clusters and controlling its pressure and speed, preferably after applying vacuum cycles of at least 10' bar between
35° and 500°C for degassing the clusters; c) creating an active core for the reactions by heating the clusters up to a temperature
that is higher than the Debye temperature TD of the metal, preferably a temperature close to a temperature at which a sliding of
reticular planes occurs, in order to adsorb in the clusters the hydrogen as H- ions; d) triggering the reactions by a mechanical, ther-
mal, ultrasonic, electric or magnetic impulse on the active core, causing the atoms of the metal to capture the hydrogen ions, with
liberation of heat, preferably in the presence of a gradient of temperature on the active core; e)removing the heat maintaining the
temperature above TD, preferably in the presence of a magnetic and/or electric field of predetermined intensity. The active core can
comprise a sintered material of micro/nanometric clusters, or a clusters powder collected in a container, or a deposit of clusters
onto a substrate of predetermined volume and shape, with at least 109  clusters per square centimetre of surface, obtainable by
means of methods such as sputtering, spraying evaporation and condensation of metal, epitaxial deposition, by heating up to ap-
proaching the melting point and then slow cooling, such methods followed by quick cooling for freezing the cluster structure. W
O
20
10
/0
58
2
8
8
A
l
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 1 -
TITLE
METHOD FOR PRODUCING ENERGY AND APPARATUS THEREFOR
DESCRIPTION
Field of the invention

5 	The present invention relates to a process for producing energy by nuclear
reactions between a metal and hydrogen that is adsorbed on the crystalline
structure of the metal. Furthermore, the invention relates to an energy generator
that carries out such reactions.
Description of the prior art
10 	A method for producing heat by nuclear reactions caused by hydrogen that
is adsorbed on a Nickel active core has been described in W095/20316, in the
name of Piantelli et. al.. Improvements of the process are described in Focardi,
Gabbani, Montalbano, Piantelli, Veronesi, "Large excess heat production in Ni-H
systems", in II Nuovo Cimento, vol. IIIA, N.11, november 1998, and bibliography
15 	therein.
A problem that was observed during the experiments was the preparation
of the cores on which hydrogen had to be adsorbed and the reactions had to be
carried out; such cores were made of Nickel and had the shape of small bars.
One of the various critical aspects of the process was the choice of a
20 suitable method for adsorbing hydrogen and the quality of the hydrogen matter,
as well as the repeatability of the triggering conditions of the process.
Other critical aspects were how to clean the small bar before the
adsorption of the hydrogen, as well as how to optimize the optimal bar surface
conditions and the method for triggering and shutting down the reactions.
25 	Due to such problems, the set up of the process and its industrial
exploitation turned out to be somewhat difficult.
A further critical aspect is the core sizing and design to attain a desired
power.
In DE4024515 a process is described for obtaining energy from the
30 nuclear fusion of hydrogen isotopes, in which the atoms are brought into contact
with clusters that contains from three to one hundred thousand atoms of a
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 2 -
transition metal, and in which the clusters are obtained by cooling finely
subdivided metal particles.
Summary of the invention
It is therefore a feature of the present invention to provide a method for
5 producing energy by nuclear reactions of hydrogen that is adsorbed in a
crystalline structure of a metal, which ensures repeatability of the triggering
conditions of the reactions.
It is, furthermore, a feature of the present invention to provide such a
method for industrially making the precursors of the active cores, and for
10 	industrially adsorbing hydrogen in them.
It is another feature of the present invention to provide an energy
generator that effects the above described nuclear reactions, whose production
rate and size are also such that an industrial production is allowed.
It is similarly a feature of the present invention to provide such a generator,
is which allows easily adjusting the output power.
It is a further feature of the present invention to provide such a generator,
which can be easily shut down.
These and other features are accomplished by a method for producing
energy by nuclear reactions between hydrogen and a metal, said method
20 	providing the steps of:
— prearranging a determined quantity of crystals of a transition metal, said
crystals arranged as micro/nanometric clusters that have a predetermined
crystalline structure, each of said clusters having a number of atoms of said
transition metal which is less than a predetermined number of atoms;
25 — 	bringing hydrogen into contact with said clusters;
— heating said determined quantity of clusters up to an adsorption
temperature larger than a predetermined critical temperature, that is adapted to
cause an adsorption into said clusters of said hydrogen as H- ions, said
hydrogen as H- ions remaining available for said nuclear reactions within said
30 active core after said heating step;
— triggering said nuclear reactions between said hydrogen as H- ions and
said metal within said clusters by an impulsive action exerted on said active core
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 3 -
that causes said H- ions to be captured into respective atoms of said clusters,
said succession of reactions causing a production of heat;
— 	removing said heat from said active core maintaining the temperature of
said active core above said critical temperature, said step of removing said heat
5 carried out according to a predetermined power.
Advantageously, said step of prearranging is carried out in such a way that
said determined quantity of crystals of said transition metal in the form of
micro/nanometric clusters is proportional to said power.
The number of atoms that form each cluster is the variable through which
10 the predetermined power can be obtained from an active core that comprises a
predetermined amount of metal. In fact, each cluster is a site where a reaction
takes place, therefore the power that can be obtained is substantially
independent from the clusters size, i.e. from the number of atoms that form the
cluster.
15 	In particular, the number of atoms of the clusters is selected from a group
of numbers that are known for giving rise to structures that are more stable than
other aggregates that comprise a different number of atoms. Such stability is a
condition to attain a high reactivity of the clusters with respect to hydrogen to
give H- ions. For instance, a stability function has been identified for Nickel,
20 which depends upon the number of atoms that form the clusters, obtaining
specific stability peaks that correspond to that particular numbers.
The hydrogen that is used in the method can be natural hydrogen, i.e., in
particular, hydrogen that contains deuterium with an isotopic abundance
substantially equal to 0,015%. Alternatively, such hydrogen can be hydrogen
25 with a deuterium content which is distinct from that above indicated, and/or
hydrogen with a significant tritium content.
Preferably, the hydrogen in use is molecular hydrogen H2; alternatively,
the hydrogen is preliminarily ionized as H-, or it can be a mixture that contains
H-  and H2.
30 	 The transition metal can be selected from the group comprised of: Sc, Ti,
V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Y, Zr, Nb, Pd, Mo, Tc, Ru, Rh, Ag, Cd, Lu, Hf, Ta, W,
Re, Os, Ir, Pt, Au, lanthanoids, actinoids. Such metals belong to one of the four
transition groups , i.e.:
— 	metals that have a partially filled 3d-shell, e.g. Nickel;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-4-
— metals that have a partially filled 4d-shell, e.g. Rhodium;
- metals that have a partially filled 5d-shell, i.e. the "rare earths" or
lanthanoids, e.g. Cerium;
— metals that have a partially filled 5d-shell, i.e. the actinonoids, e.g.
5 Thorium.
The metal in use can also be an alloy of two or more than two of the above
listed metals.
Among the listed transition metals, or their alloys, the ones are preferred
those that crystallize with a crystalline structure selected from the group
10 comprised of:
— face-centred cubic crystalline structure;
— body-centred cubic crystalline structure;
— compact hexagonal structure.
Advantageously, metals are used that have a crystalline open face
is 	structure, in order to assist the H- ions adsorption into the clusters.
Preferably, said transition metal is Nickel. In particular, said Nickel is
selected from the group comprised of:
— natural Nickel, i.e. a mixture of isotopes like Nickel 58, Nickel 60, Nickel
61, Nickel 62, Nickel 64;
20 - 	a Nickel that contains only one isotope, said isotope selected from the
group comprised of:
- Nickel 58;
- Nickel 60
- Nickel 61;
25
-
Nickel 62;
- Nickel 64;
- a formulation comprising at least two of such isotopes at a desired
proportion.
The H- ions can be obtained by treating, under particular operative
30 conditions, hydrogen H2 molecules that have been previously adsorbed on said
transition metal surface, where the semi-free valence electrons form a plasma.
In particular, a heating is needed to cause lattice vibrations, i.e. phonons, whose
energy is higher than a first activation energy threshold, through non-linear and
anharmonic phenomena. In such conditions, the following events can occur:
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-5-
- a dissociation of the hydrogen molecules that is adsorbed on the surface;
- an interaction with valence electrons of the metal, and formation of H- ions;
- an adsorption of the H- ions into the clusters, in particular the clusters that
form the two or three crystal layers that are most close to the surface. The H-

5 	ions can just physically interact with the metal, or can chemically bond with it, in
which case hydrides can be formed.
The H- ions can also be adsorbed into the lattice interstices, but
- adsorption at the grain edges, by trapping the ions into the lattice defects;
- replacement of an atom of the metal of a clusters
io may also occur.
After such adsorption step, the H- ions interact with the atoms of the
clusters, provided that a second activation threshold is exceeded, which is
higher than the first threshold. By exceeding this second threshold, in
accordance with the Pauli exclusion principle and with the Heisenberg
15 uncertainty principle, the conditions are created for replacing electrons of metal
atoms with H- ions, and, accordingly, for forming metal-hydrogen complex
atoms. This event can take place due to the fermion nature of H- ion; however,
since H- ions have a mass 1838 times larger than an electron mass, they tend
towards deeper layers, and cause an emission of Auger electrons and of X rays.
20 Subsequently, since the H- ion Bohr radius is comparable with the metal core
radius, the H- ions can be captured by the metal core, causing a structural
reorganization and freeing energy by mass defect; the H- ions can now be
expelled as protons, and can generate nuclear reactions with the neighbouring
cores.
25 	 More in detail, the complex atom that has formed by the metal atom
capturing the H- ion, in the full respect of the energy conservation principle, of
the Pauli exclusion principle, and of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, is
forced towards an excited status, therefore it reorganizes itself by the migration
of the H- ion towards deeper orbitals or levels, i.e. towards a minimum energy
30 state, thus emitting Auger electrons and X rays during the level changes. The H-
ion falls into a potential hole and concentrates the energy which was previously
distributed upon a volume whose radius is about 1012  m into a smaller volume
whose radius is about 5x10-15  m. At the end of the process, the H- ion is at a
distance from the core that is comparable with the nuclear radius; in fact in the
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 6 -
fundamental status of the complex atom that is formed by adding the H- ion,
due to its mass that is far greater the mass of the electron, the H- ion is forced
to stay at such deep level at a distance from the core that is comparable with
the nuclear radius, in accordance with Bohr radius calculation. As above stated,
5 owing to the short distance from the core, a process is triggered in which the H-
ion is captured by the core, with a structural reorganization and energy release
by mass defect, similarly to what happens in the case of electron capture with
structural reorganization and energy release by mass defect or in case of loss of
two electrons, due to their intrinsic instability, during the fall process towards the
10 lowest layers, and eventually an expulsion of the the H- ion takes place as a
proton, as experimentally detected in the cloud chamber, and nuclear reactions
can occur with other neighbouring cores, said reactions detected as
transmutations on the active core after the production of energy.
According to the above, the actual process cannot be considered as a
15 fusion process of hydrogen atoms, in particular of particular hydrogen isotopes
atoms; instead, the process has to be understood as an interaction of a
transition metal and hydrogen in general, in its particular form of H- ion.
Advantageously, said predetermined number of said transition metal
atoms of said clusters is such that a portion of material of said transition metal in
20 the form of clusters or without clusters shows a transition of a physical property
of said metal, said property selected from the group comprised of:
- thermal conductivity;
- electric conductivity;
- refraction index.
25 	The micro/nanometric clusters structure is a requirement for producing H-
ions and for the above cited orbital and nuclear capture processes. For each
transition metal, a critical number of atoms can be identified below which a level
discrete structure (electronic density, functional of the electronic density and
Kohn-Sham effective potential) and Pauli antisymmetry, tend to prevail over a
30 band structure according to Thomas-Fermi approach. The discrete levels
structure is at the origin of the main properties of the clusters, some of which
have been cited above. Such features can be advantageously used for
aqnalysing the nature of the surface, i.e. for establishing whether clusters are
present or not.
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 7 -
In particular said step of preparing a determined quantity of
micro/nanometric clusters comprises a step of depositing a predetermined
amount of said transition metal in the form of micro/nanometric clusters on a
surface of a substrate, i.e. a solid body that has a predetermined volume and a
5 predetermined shape, wherein said substrate surface contains at least 109
clusters per square centimetre.
The step of prearranging a determined quantity of clusters can also
provide a step of sintering said determined quantity of micro/nanometric
clusters, said sintering preserving the crystalline structure and preserving
10 	substantially the size of said clusters.
The step of preparing the determined quantity of clusters can provide
collecting a powder of clusters into a container, i.e. collecting a determined
quantity of clusters or aggregation of loose clusters.
Preferably, said substrate contains in its surface at least 1010  clusters per
15 square centimetre, in particular at least 1011  clusters per square centimetre,
more in particular at least 1012  clusters per square centimetre.
Preferably, said clusters form on said substrate a thin layer of said metal,
whose thickness is lower than 1 micron; in particular such thickness is of the
same magnitude of the lattice of the crystalline structure of the transition metal.
20  In fact, the core activation by adsorption of the H- ions into the clusters concerns
only a few surface crystal layers.
In particular said step of depositing said transition metal is effected by a
process of physical deposition of vapours of said metal.
Said process of depositing can be a process of sputtering, in which the
25 substrate receives under vacuum a determined amount of the metal in the form
of atoms that are emitted by a body that is bombarded by a beam of particles.
Alternatively, the process of depositing can comprise an evaporation step
or a thermal sublimation step and a subsequent condensation step in which the
metal condensates onto said substrate.
30 	Alternatively, the process of depositing can be performed by means of an
epitaxial deposition, in which the deposit attains a crystalline structure that is
similar to the structure of the substrate, thus allowing the control of such
parameters.
The transition metal can be deposited also by a process of spraying.
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 8 -
Alternatively, the step of depositing the transition metal can provide a step
of heating the metal up to a temperature that is close to the melting point of the
metal, followed by a step of slow cooling. Preferably, the slow cooling proceeds
up to an average core temperature of about 600°C.
s 	The step of depositing the metal is followed by a step of quickly cooling the
substrate and the transition metal as deposited, in order to cause a "freezing" of
the metal in the form of clusters that have a predetermined crystalline structure.
In particular said quickly cooling occurs by causing a current of hydrogen
to flow in a vicinity of said transition metal as deposited on said substrate, said
10 current having a predetermined temperature that is lower than the temperature
of said substrate.
Advantageously, said step of bringing hydrogen into contact with said
clusters is preceded by a step of cleaning said substrate. In particular, said step
of cleaning is made by applying a vacuum of at least 10' bar at a temperature
15 set between 350°C and 500°C for a predetermined time.
Advantageously, said vacuum is applied according to a predetermined
number, preferably not less than 10, of vacuum cycles and subsequent
restoration of a substantially atmospheric pressure of hydrogen. This way, it is
possible to quantitatively remove the gas adsorbed within the metal, in particular
20 the gas which is adsorbed in the metal of the active core. In fact, such gas
drastically reduces the interaction between the plasma of valence electrons and
the hydrogen ions, and can limit or avoid the adsorption of the hydrogen in the
clusters, even if an initial adsorption has occurred on the metal surface. If the
substrate and the deposited metal are exposed to a temperature that is
25 significantly above 500°C, the cluster structure can be irremediably damaged.
Advantageously, during said step of bringing hydrogen into contact with
said clusters, said hydrogen has a partial pressure set between 0,001 millibar
and 10 bar, in particular set between 1 millibar and 2 bar, in order to ensure an
optimal number of hits between the surface of said clusters and the hydrogen
30 molecules: in fact, an excessive pressure increases the frequency of the hits,
such that it can cause surface desorption, as well as other parasitic phenomena.
Advantageously, during said step of bringing hydrogen into contact with
said clusters, the hydrogen flows with a speed less than 3 m/s. Said hydrogen
flows preferably according to a direction that is substantially parallel to the
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 9 -
surface of said clusters. In such condition, the hits between the hydrogen
molecules and the metal substrate occur according to small impact angles,
which assist the adsorption on the surface of the clusters and prevents re-
emission phenomena in the subsequent steps of H- ions formation.
5 	Advantageously, said step of creating an active core by hydrogen
adsorption into said clusters is carried out at a temperature that is close to a
temperature at which a sliding of the reticular planes of the transition metal, said
temperature at which a sliding occurs is set between the respective
temperatures that correspond to the absorption peaks a and 13.
10 	Advantageously, the concentration of H- ions with respect to the transition
metal atoms of said clusters is larger than 0,01, to improve the efficiency of the
energy production process. In particular, this concentration is larger than 0,08.
Advantageously, after said step of creating an active core by adsorbing
hydrogen into said clusters a step is provided of cooling said active core down to
is the room temperature, and said step of triggering a succession of nuclear
reactions provides a quick rise of the temperature of said active core from said
room temperature to said temperature which is higher than said predetermined
critical temperature. In particular, said quick temperature rise takes place in a
time that is shorter than five minutes.
20 	The critical temperature is normally set between 100 and 450°C, more
often between 200 and 450°C. More in detail, the critical temperature is larger
than the Debye temperature of said metal.
In particular, said step of triggering said nuclear reactions provides an
impulsive triggering action selected from the group comprised of:
25 — 	a thermal shock, in particular caused by a flow of a gas, in particular of
hydrogen, which has a predetermined temperature that is lower than the active
core temperature;
— a mechanical impulse, in particular a mechanical impulse whose duration
is less than 1/10 of second;
30 — 	an ultrasonic impulse, in particular an ultrasonic impulse whose frequency
is set between 20 and 40 kHz;
— a laser ray that is impulsively cast onto said active core;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-10-
— an impulsive application of a package of electromagnetic fields, in
particular said fields selected from the group comprised of: a radiofrequency
pulse whose frequency is larger than 1 kHz; X rays; y rays;
— an electrostriction impulse that is generated by an impulsive electric

5 	current that flows through an electrostrictive portion of said active core;
— an impulsive application of a beam of elementary particles; in particular,
such elementary particles selected from the group comprised of electrons,
protons and neutrons;
— an impulsive application of a beam of ions of elements, in particular of ions
10 of one or more transition metals, said elements selected from a group that
excludes 0; Ar; Ne; Kr; Rn; N; Xe.
— an electric voltage impulse that is applied between two points of a
piezoelectric portion of said active core;
— an impulsive magnetostriction that is generated by a magnetic field pulse
15 	along said active core which has a magnetostrictive portion.
Such impulsive triggering action generates lattice vibrations, i.e. phonons,
whose amplitude is such that the H- ions can exceed the second activation
threshold thus creating the conditions that are required for replacing electrons of
atoms of the metal, to form temporary metal-hydrogen complex ions.
20 Preferably, said step of triggering said nuclear reactions is associated with
a step of creating a gradient, i.e. a temperature difference, between two points
of said active core. This gradient is preferably set between 100°C and 300°C.
This enhances the conditions for anharmonic lattice motions, which is at the
basis of the mechanism by which H- ions are produced.
25 	Advantageously, a step is provided of modulating said energy that is
delivered by said nuclear reactions.
In particular, said step of modulating comprises removing and/or adding
active cores or active core portions from/to a generation chamber which
contains one or more active cores during said step of removing said heat.
30 Said step of modulating comprises a step of approaching/spacing apart
sheets of said transition metal which form said active core in the presence of an
hydrogen flow.
The step of modulating can furthermore be actuated by absorption protons
and alpha particles in lamina-shaped absorbers that are arranged between
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 11 -
sheets of said transition metal which form said active core. The density of such
emissions is an essential feature for adjusting said power.
Advantageously, a step is provided of shutting down said nuclear reactions
in the active core, that comprises an action selected from the group comprised
5 	of:
- a further mechanical impulse;
- cooling said active core below a predetermined temperature, in particular
below said predetermined critical temperature;
- a gas flow, in particular an Argon flow, on said active core.
10 	In particular, said step of shutting down said nuclear reactions can
comprise lowering the heat exchange fluid inlet temperature below said critical
temperature.
Advantageously, said succession of reactions with production of heat is
carried out in the presence of a predetermined sector selected from the group
15 	comprised of:
— a magnetic induction field whose intensity is set between 1 Gauss and
70000 Gauss;
- an electric field whose intensity is set between 1 V/m and 300000 V/m.
The objects of the invention are also achieved by an energy generator that
20 is obtained from a succession of nuclear reactions between hydrogen and a
metal, wherein said metal is a transition metal, said generator comprising:
- an active core that comprises a predetermined amount of said transition
metal;
- a generation chamber that in use contains said active core;
25
-
a means for heating said active core within said generation chamber up to
a temperature that is higher than a predetermined critical temperature;
— a means for triggering said nuclear reaction between said transition metal
and said hydrogen;
— a means for removing from said generation chamber the heat that is
30 developed during said reaction in said active core according to a determined
power;
the main feature of said generator is that:
— said active core comprises a determined quantity of crystals of said
transition metal, said crystals being micro/nanometric clusters that have a
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 12 -
predetermined crystalline structure according to said transition metal, each of
said clusters having a number of atoms of said transition metal that is less than
a predetermined number of atoms.
Advantageously, said determined quantity of crystals of said transition

5 	metal in the form of micro/nanometric clusters is proportional to said power.
Advantageously, said clusters contain hydrogen that is adsorbed as H-
ions.
Preferably, said means for heating said active core comprises an electric
resistance in which, in use an electric current flows.
10 	In particular, said active core comprises a substrate, i.e. a solid body that
has a predetermined volume and a predetermined shape, on whose surface
said determined quantity of micro/nanometric clusters of said transition metal is
deposited, for at least 109  clusters per square centimetre, preferably at least
1010  clusters per square centimetre, in particular at least 1011  clusters per square
15 	centimetre, more in particular at least 1012  clusters per square centimetre.
Advantageously, said active core has an extended surface, i.e. a surface
whose area is larger than the area of a convex envelope of said active core, in
particular an area A and a volume V occupied by said active core with respect to
a condition selected from the group comprised of:
20 	- 	NV > 12/L, in particular AN > 100/L;
— AN > 500 m2/m3,
where L is a size of encumbrance of said active core, said extended surface in
particular obtained using as substrate a body that is permeable to said
hydrogen, said body preferably selected from the group comprised of:
25 - a package of sheets of said transition metal, each sheet having at least
one face available for adsorbing said hydrogen, in particular a face that
comprises an extended surface;
— an aggregate obtained by sintering particles of whichever shape, in
particular balls, cylinders, prisms, bars, laminas, normally said particles having
30 nano- or micrometric granulometry, said particles defining porosities of said
active core;
— an aggregate obtained by sintering micro/nanometric clusters of said
transition metal;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-13-
— a powder of clusters collected within a container, said convex envelope
limited by a container of said powder, for example a container made of ceramic.
Preferably, said transition metal is selected from the group comprised of:
Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Y, Zr, Nb, Pd, Mo, Tc, Ru, Rh, Ag, Cd, Lu, Hf,
5 Ta, W, Re, Os, Ir, Pt, Au, lanthanoids, actinoids, an alloy of two or more than
two of the above listed metals; in particular said Nickel is selected from the
group comprised of:
— natural Nickel, i.e. a mixture of isotopes like Nickel 58, Nickel 60, Nickel
61, Nickel 62, Nickel 64;
to — 	a Nickel that contains only one isotope, said isotope selected from the
group comprised of:
- Nickel 58;
- Nickel 60
- Nickel 61;
15
-
Nickel 62;
- Nickel 64;
- a formulation comprising at least two of such isotopes at a desired
proportion.
Said means for triggering can be:
20 - 	a means for creating a thermal shock in said active core, in particular by
means of a flow of hydrogen that is kept at a predetermined temperature lower
than the temperature of the active core;
— a means for creating a mechanical impulse, in particular an impulse that
lasts less than 1/10 of second;
25
-
a means for creating an ultrasonic impulse;
- a means for casting a laser ray impulse onto said active core;
- a means for impulsively applying a package of electromagnetic fields, in
particular said fields selected from the group comprised of: a radiofrequency
pulse whose frequency is larger than 1 kHz; X rays; y rays;
30 - 	a means for creating an impulsive electric current through an
electrostrictive portion of said active core,
— a means for applying an electric voltage impulse between two points of a
piezoelectric portion of said active core;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-14-
- a means for impulsively applying a beam of elementary particles in
particular said particles selected among: electrons; protons; neutrons;
— a means for impulsively applying a beam of ions of elements, in particular
of ions of one or more transition metals, said elements selected from a group
5 that excludes 0; Ar; Ne; Kr; Rn; N; Xe.
— a means for applying a magnetic field impulse along said active core that
has a magnetostrictive portion.
Preferably, a means is associated with said means for triggering that is
adapted to create a gradient, i.e. a temperature difference between two points
10 of said active core, in particular said temperature difference set between 100°C
and 300°C.
Preferably, said active core is arranged in use at a distance less than 2
mm from an inner wall of said generation chamber. This way, the production of
H- ions is enhanced, since this distance is comparable with the mean free path
15 of the hydrogen molecules at the working temperature and the working
pressure.
Advantageously, said generator comprises a means for modulating said
energy that is released by said nuclear reactions.
Said means for modulating can comprise a means for removing/adding
20 active cores or active core portions from/into said generation chamber.
In particular, said active core comprises a set of thin sheets, preferably
said thin sheets having a thickness that is less than one micron, that are
arranged facing one another and said means for modulating comprises a
structure that is adapted to approach and/or to space apart said sheets while a
25 	hydrogen flow is modulated that flows in a vicinity of said core.
Still in the case of an active core which comprises sheets that are arranged
adjacent to one another, said means for modulating can comprise lamina-
shaped absorbers that are arranged between the sheets of said transition metal
which form said active core, said absorbers adapted to absorb protons and
30 	alpha particles that are emitted by the active core during the reactions.
Advantageously, said generator comprises furthermore a means for
shutting down said reaction in the active core.
In particular, said means for shutting down are selected from the group
comprised of:
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-15-
— a means for creating a further mechanical impulse;
— a means for cooling said core below a predetermined temperature value, in
particular below said predetermined critical temperature;
— a means for conveying a gas, in particular Argon, on said active core.
5 In particular, said active core comprises a set of thin sheets, preferably
said sheets having a thickness that is less than one micron, said sheets
arranged facing one another and said means for modulating provided by said
structure and by said absorbers.
Advantageously, said generator comprises a means for creating a

10 	predetermined field at said active core, said field selected from the group
comprised of:
— a magnetic induction field whose intensity is set between 1 Gauss and
70000 Gauss;
— an electric field whose intensity is set between 1 V/m and 300000 V/m.
15 	Advantageously, said generator comprises a section for producing a
determined quantity of clusters on a solid substrate, said section comprising:
— a clusters preparation chamber;
— a means for loading said substrate in said clusters preparation chamber;
— a means for creating and maintaining vacuum conditions about said
20 substrate within said clusters preparation chamber, in particular a means for
creating and maintaining a residual pressure equal or less than 10-9  bar;
— a means for heating and keeping said substrate at a high temperature in
said clusters preparation chamber, in particular a means for bringing and
keeping said substrate at a temperature set between 350°C and 500°C when
25 	the residual pressure is equal or less than 10-9  bar;
— a means for depositing said transition metal on said substrate, preferably
by a technique selected from the group comprised of:
— a sputtering technique;
— a spraying technique;
30 	- 	a technique comprising evaporation and then condensation of said
predetermined amount of said metal on said substrate;
— an epitaxial deposition technique;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-16-
- a technique comprising heating the metal up to a temperature that is
close to the melting point of the metal, said heating followed by a
slow cooling;
— a means for quickly cooling said substrate and said transition metal, such

5 	that said transition metal is frozen as clusters that have said crystalline
structure.
Advantageously, said section for producing a determined quantity of
clusters comprises a means for detecting a transition of a physical property
during said step of depositing, in particular of a physical property selected from
to the group comprised of:
— thermal conductivity;
— electric conductivity;
— refraction index.
said transition occurring when said predetermined number of atoms of said
15 	transition metal in a growing cluster is exceeded.
Advantageously, said section for producing a determined quantity of
clusters comprises a means for detecting a clusters surface density, i.e. a mean
number of clusters in one square centimetre of said surface during said step of
depositing.
20 	Preferably, said section for producing a determined quantity of clusters
comprises a concentration control means for controlling the H- ions
concentration with respect to the transition metal atoms of said clusters.
Preferably, said section for producing a determined quantity of clusters
comprises a thickness control means for controlling the thickness of a layer of
25 said clusters, in order to ensure that said thickness is set between 1 nanometre
and 1 micron.
Advantageously, said generator comprises a section for producing an
active core, said section for producing an active core comprising:
— a hydrogen treatment chamber that is distinct from said generation
30 chamber;
— a means for loading said determined quantity of clusters in said treatment
chamber;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-17-
— a means for heating said determined quantity of clusters in said hydrogen
treatment chamber up to a temperature that is higher than a predetermined
critical temperature;
— a means for causing said hydrogen to flow within said hydrogen treatment
5 chamber, said hydrogen having a predetermined partial pressure, in particular a
partial pressure set between 0,001 millibar and 10 bar, more in particular
between 1 millibar and 2 bar;
— means for transferring said active core from said hydrogen treatment
chamber into said generation chamber.
10 	Preferably, said means for causing said hydrogen to flow are such that
said hydrogen flows according to a direction that is substantially parallel to an
exposed surface of said substrate, In particular, said hydrogen having a speed
that is less than 3 m/s.
Advantageously, said section for producing an active core comprises a
15 means for cooling down to room temperature said prepared active core, and
said means for heating said active core within said generation chamber are
adapted to heat said active core up to said predetermined temperature which is
set between 100 and 450°C in a time less than five minutes.
In particular, said quickly cooling in said clusters preparation chamber
20 and/or said cooling down to room temperature in said hydrogen treatment
chamber is/are obtained by means of said hydrogen flow on said active core,
said flow having a predetermined temperature that is lower than the temperature
of said active core.
The objects of the invention are also achieved by an apparatus for
25 producing energy that comprises:
— a means for generating a substance in the vapour or gas state at a first
predetermined pressure, said means for generating associated with a heat
source;
— a means for expanding said substance from said first pressure to a second
30 predetermined pressure producing useful work;
- a means for cooling said substance down to a predetermined temperature,
in particular said predetermined temperature is less than the evaporation
temperature of said substance in the vapour state;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-18-
— a means for compressing said cooled substance back to said first
pressure;
wherein said means are crossed in turn by a substantially fixed amount of said
substance, said means for compressing feeding said means for generating;
5 the main feature of this apparatus is that said heat source comprises an energy
generator according to the invention as defined means above.
In particular, the above apparatus uses a closed Rankine cycle;
advantageously, the thermodynamic fluid is an organic fluid that has a critical
temperature and a critical pressure that are at least high as in the case of
10

toluene, or of an ORC fluid, in particular of a fluid that is based on 1,1,1,3,3
pentafluoropropane, also known as HFC 245fa or simply as 245fa.
Brief description of the drawings
The invention will be made clearer with the following description of an
exemplary embodiment thereof, exemplifying but not !imitative, with reference to
15 the attached drawings in which:
— figure 1 is a block diagram of an embodiment of the method according to
the invention;
— figure 2 is a diagrammatical view of a crystal layer that is formed by
clusters deposited on the surface of a substrate;
20 - 	figure 3 is a diagrammatical view of the interactions between hydrogen and
the clusters in a local enlarged view of Fig. 2;
— figure 4 indicates the transition metals that are most adapted to be used in
the method according to the invention;
— figure 5 diagrammatically represents the orbital capture of a negative
25 hydrogen ion by a transition metal atom;
— figures 6, 7, 8 are diagrammatical representations of a face-centred cubic
crystalline structure;
— figure 9 diagrammatically represents a body-centred cubic crystalline
structure;
30 - 	figure 10 diagrammatically represents a crystalline compact hexagonal
structure;
— figure 11 is a diagrammatical view of the distribution of hydrogen atoms in
such a crystalline structure;
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-19-
— figure 12 is a block diagram of the parts of the step of prearranging
clusters of Fig. 1, to obtain a clusters surface structure;
— figure 13 shows a typical temperature profile of what is shown in Fig. 12;
— figure 14 is a block diagram of the parts of the step of prearranging
5 clusters and of the step of hydrogen treatment of said clusters to obtain an
active core;
— figure 15 shows a typical thermal profile of a process that comprises the
steps shown in Fig. 14;
— figure 16 shows a reactor that is adapted to produce energy, according to
10 the present invention, by an impulsively triggered nuclear reaction of hydrogen
adsorbed on a transition metal;
— figure 17 diagrammatically shows a device for preparing an active core
according to the invention;
— figure 18 diagrammatically shows a generator that comprises the reactor of
15 	Fig. 16 and the device of Fig. 17;
— figures 19 to 23 show alternate exemplary embodiments of the active core
according to the invention;
— figure 24 shows a temperature gradient through an active core.
Description of preferred exemplary embodiments.
20 	With reference to Figs. 1, 2 and 3, an exemplary embodiment 100 of the
method according to the invention is described, for producing energy by a
succession of nuclear reactions between hydrogen 31 and a transition metal 19.
According to this exemplary embodiment, the method provides a step 110 of
prearranging clusters 21, for example a layer of clusters 20 on a substrate 22,
25 this layer 20 defined by a surface 23. A crystal layer 20 of thickness d,
preferably set between 1 nanometre and 1 micron is diagrammatically shown.
The metal is deposited with a process adapted to ensure that the crystals as
deposited have normally a number of atoms of the transition metal less than a
predetermined critical number, beyond which the crystal matter looses the
30 character of clusters. In the case of prearranging the clusters on a substrate, the
process of depositing is adapted to ensure that 1 square centimetre of surface
23 defines on average at least 109  clusters 21.
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 20 -
The method provides then a treatment step 120 of the clusters with
hydrogen 31, in which hydrogen 31 is brought into contact with surface 23 of the
clusters 21, in order to obtain a population of molecules 33 of hydrogen that is
adsorbed on surface 23, as shown in Fig. 3. The bonds between the atoms of
5 the hydrogen molecules are weakened, up to having a homolytic or heterolytic
scission of the molecules 33, obtaining, respectively, a couple of hydrogen
atoms 34 or a couple consisting of a hydrogen negative H-  ion 35 and a
hydrogen positive H+  ion 36, from each diatomic molecule 33 of hydrogen. A
contribution to this process of weakening the bond and of making, in particular
10 H- ions 35, is given by a heating step 130 of surface 23 of the clusters up to a
temperature T1 larger than a predetermined critical temperature TD, as shown in
Fig. 15; this heating causes furthermore, an adsorption of the hydrogen in the
form of H- ions 37 into clusters 21 (Fig. 3).
The clusters 21 with the adsorbed hydrogen 37 in this form represent an
15 active core that is available for nuclear reactions, which can be started place by
a triggering step 140; such step consists of supplying an impulse of energy 26
that causes the capture 150 by an atom 38 of the clusters of the H- ions 37
adsorbed within the clusters, with a consequent exchange of an electron 42, as
diagrammatically shown in Fig. 5, such that the succession of reactions causes
20 a release of energy 43 to which a step 160 of production of heat 27 is
associated, which requires a step of removal 170 of this heat towards an use,
not shown.
During the step 110 of prearranging clusters 21, the predetermined
number of atoms of the transition metal of the clusters is controlled by observing
25 a physical property of the transition metal, chosen for example between thermal
conductivity, electric conductivity, refraction index. These physical quantities
have a net transition, when the number of atoms of a crystal aggregate exceeds
a critical number above which the aggregate looses the properties of a cluster.
For each transition metal, in fact is a number of atoms detectable below which a
30 discrete level structure according to Kohn-Sham tends to prevail over a band
structure according to Thomas-Fermi, which is responsible of the main features
that define the many features of the clusters, some of which properties are used
for determining the nature of surface 23 during the step 110 of prearranging the
clusters.
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 21 -
In Fig. 4 in the periodic table of the chemical elements the position is
indicated of the transition metals that are adapted for the process. They are in
detail, Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Y, Zr, Nb, Pd, Mo, Tc, Ru, Rh, Ag, Cd,
Lu, Hf, Ta, W, Re, Os, Ir, Pt, Au, lanthanoids, actinoids, an alloy of two or more
5 than two of the above listed metals. They belong to one of the four transition
metals groups, i.e.:
— metals that have a partially filled 3d-shell, e.g. Nickel;
— metals that have a partially filled 4d-shell, e.g. Rhodium;
— metals that have a partially filled 5d-shell, i.e. the "rare earths" or
10 	lanthanoids, e.g. Cerium;
— metals that have a partially filled 5d-shell, i.e. the actinonoids, e.g.
Thorium. The particular electronic conformation of the transition metals allows in
fact that the conditions of anharmonicity are created such that the wave vectors
sum with each other of the phonons, which interfere at the surface of the metal
15 that is also a surface of discontinuity, and a reticular fluctuation is generated
that is both in spatial phase and in time phase within the clusters, and such that
an energy "gap" is exceeded that is necessary to start a chain of processes
whose final act is the orbital capture of the H-  ion 37, as diagrammatically
shown in Fig. 5. In order to achieve a result that is industrially acceptable, it is
20 necessary to reach a temperature higher than the Debye temperature TD, for
example the temperature T1  as shown in fig. 15, which shows a typical
temperature trend from heating step 130 to heat removal step 170, during which
a balance value is obtained of the temperature Teq  at the active core 1. The
triggering step is assisted by the presence of a thermal gradient AT along the
25 metal surface of the active core 1, as shown for example in Fig. 24.
The clusters 21 (Figs. 2 and 3) have a crystalline structure 19 that is typical
of the chosen transition metals or alloy of transition metals. In Figs. from 6 to 10
crystal reticules with open faces are shown, which assist the process for
adsorption of the hydrogen, in the form of H- ion 37 (Fig. 3), into a cluster 21,
30 characterised by such structural arrangement. They comprise:
— face-centred cubic crystalline structure, fcc (110) (Figs. 6, 7 and 8);
— body-centred cubic crystalline structure, bcc (111) (Fig. 9);
— compact hexagonal structure, hcp (1010) (Fig. 10).
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 22 -
For example, the Nickel can crystallize according to the face-centred cubic
structure shown in the perspective view of Fig. 6, where six atoms 2 are shown
arranged according to a diagonal plane.
In Fig. 7 a top plan view is shown of a three-dimensional model comprising
5 a plurality of atoms arranged according to the structure of Fig. 6, whereas Fig. 8
is a further perspective view of a model that shows, between the atoms of the
upper level, six atoms 2 that are arranged on two different rows separate from a
space 60. As shown in Fig. 11, in this space 60 the hydrogen atoms 37 are
arranged in the form of adsorbed H- ions in the above described crystalline
10 structure. This occurs also for transition metals that crystallize in a body-centred
cubic crystalline structure, as shown in the perspective view of Fig. 9, where the
five atoms 2 are shown arranged at the vertices and at the centre of a diagonal
plane of a cube, and also for metals that crystallize in the structure of Fig. 10.
The step of prearranging clusters 110, in case of an active core that is
15 obtained by depositing a predetermined amount of said transition metal in the
form of micro/nanometric clusters on a surface of a substrate, is shown with
higher detail in the block diagram of Fig. 12 and in the temperature profile of Fig.
13. In particular, after a step 111 of loading a substrate in a preparation
chamber, a step 113 is provided of depositing the transition metal on the
20 substrate preferably by means of sputtering, or spraying, or epitaxial deposition;
the deposited metal is then heated further up to a temperature close to the
melting temperature Tf (Fig. 13), in order to bring it to an incipient fusion, and
then follows a slow cooling, step 118, in particular up to an average core
temperature of about 600°C, after which a quick cooling 119 is operated up to
25 room temperature. This has the object of "freezing" the cluster structure that had
been obtained at high temperature, which would otherwise evolve towards
balance, without stopping at a cluster size, if the slow cooling 118 would be
continued.
In Fig. 14 a block diagram is shown an alternative step of prearranging
30 clusters 110, in which the depositing step 113 is followed by a step 114 of
cleaning the substrate, which is carried out preferably by means of repeatedly
creating and removing a vacuum of at least 10-9  bar at a temperature of at least
350°C. Such operative conditions, in particular the ultra high vacuum, have the
object for quantitatively removing any gas that is adsorbed on or adsorbed in the
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 23 -
substrate, which would reduce drastically the interactions between the valence
electron plasma of surface 23 and the hydrogen ions H-, avoiding the adsorption
of the hydrogen 31 in the clusters 21 even if a physical surface adsorption has
been achieved. Then a treatment step 120 follows of the clusters 21 with a flow
5 of cold hydrogen, which causes also the quick cooling step 119. As shown in the
diagram of Fig. 15, in a period of the cooling step 119 the temperature of the
active core is higher than the critical temperature TD, which allows an adsorption
of the hydrogen negative ions 37 in the clusters 21 (Fig. 3), such that at the end
of step 110, after the quick cooling step 119, an active core is obtained that is
10 adapted to be triggered, without that a specific treatment with hydrogen and a
specific heating step 130 are necessary (v. Fig. 1).
In any case, the step 120 of feeding hydrogen is carried out in order to
provide a relative pressure between 0,001 millibar and 10 bar, preferably
between 1 millibar and 2 bar, to ensure an optimal number of hits of the
15  hydrogen molecules 31 against surface 23, avoiding in particular surface
desorption and other undesired phenomena caused by excessive pressure;
furthermore, the speed 32 of the hydrogen molecules 31 (Fig. 3) is less than 3
m/s, and has a direction substantially parallel to surface 23, in order to obtain
small angles of impact 39 that assist the adsorption and avoid back emission
20 phenomena.
In Fig. 15, furthermore, the temperature is shown beyond which the planes
reticular start sliding, which is set between the temperatures corresponding to
the absorption peaks a and 13, above which the adsorption of the H- ions 37 in
the clusters 21 is most likely.
25 	Figure 15 refers also to the case in which, after the step of adsorption of
hydrogen, that is effected at a temperature that is higher than critical
temperature TD, a cooling step 119 is carried out at room temperature of the
active core. The step of triggering 140 follows then a specific heating step 130
starting from the room temperature up to the predetermined temperature T1 that
30 is larger than the Debye temperature of the metal TD, in a time t* that is as short
as possible, preferably less than 5 minutes, in order not to affect the structure of
the clusters and/or to cause desorbing phenomena before triggering step 140.
The critical temperature TD is normally set between 100 and 450°C, more
preferably between 200 and 450°C; hereafter the Debye temperature is
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 24 -
indicated for some of the metals above indicated: Al 426K; Cd 186K; Cr 610K;
Cu 344.5K; Au 165K; a-Fe 464K; Pb 96K; a-Mn 476K; Pt 240K; Si 640K; Ag
225K; Ta 240K; Sn 195K; Ti 420K; W 405K; Zn 300K.
Such impulsive triggering action generates lattice vibrations, or phonons,
5 having an amplitude such that the H- ions can pass the second activation
threshold and achieve the conditions necessary for replacing electrons of atoms
of the metal, creating metal-hydrogen complex ions (Fig. 5).
The orbital capture of the H- ions 37 is assisted by a gradient of
temperature between two points of the active core, in particular set between
10 100°C and 300°C, which has a trend like the example shown in Fig. 24.
In Fig. 16 an energy generator 50 is shown according to the invention,
comprising an active core 1 housed in a generation chamber 53. The active
core can be heated by an electric winding 56 that can be connected to a source
of electromotive force, not shown. A cylindrical wall 55 separates generation
is chamber 53 from an annular chamber 54, which is defined by a cylindrical
external wall 51 and have an inlet 64 and an outlet 65 for a heat exchange fluid,
which is used for removing the heat that is developed during the nuclear
reactions. The ends of central portion 51 are closed in a releasable way
respectively by a portion 52 and a portion 59, which are adapted also for
20 supporting the ends in an operative position.
Generator 50, furthermore, comprises a means 61, 62, 67 for triggering
the nuclear reaction, consisting of:

— 	a means for producing an impulsive electric current through an
electrostrictive portion of the active core;
25 - 	a means for casting a laser impulse on the active core.
In Figs. from 19 to 23 three different embodiments are shown of an active
core having an extended surface, using as substrate a body that is permeable to
hydrogen, for example a package 81 of sheets 82 of the transition metal,
wherein a surface 83 can be in turn a porous surface; alternatively, the active
30 core can also be a plurality of particles of whichever shape, preferably with
nano- or micro- granulometry, in particular micro/nanometric clusters. Such
particles can be sintered as shown in Fig. 20 to form a body 85 having a desired
geometry, or they can be loose, enclosed in a container 84, preferably of
ceramic. Another possibility, shown in Fig. 22, consists of a tube bundle 86
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 25 -
where tubes 87 act as substrate for a layer 88 of transition metal that is
deposited in the form of clusters at least on a surface portion of each tube 87.
The device of Fig. 17 has an elongated casing 10, which is associated with
a means for making and maintaining vacuum conditions inside, not shown. In
5 particular the residual pressure during the step of cleaning the substrate is kept
identical or less than 10-9  absolute bar, for removing impurities, in particular gas
that is not hydrogen. Furthermore, a means is provided, not shown in the
figures, for moving substrate 3 within casing 10, in turn on at least three stations
11, 12 and 13. Station 11 is a chamber for preparation of the clusters where the
10 surface of the substrate 3 is coated with a layer of a transition metal in the form
of clusters by a process of sputtering. In chamber 11 a means is provided, not
depicted, for bringing and maintaining the substrate at a temperature identical
or higher than 350°C. In station 12 a cooling step 119 is carried out (Figs. 14
and 15) of the deposited metal on the substrate, by feeding cold hydrogen and
15 at a pressure preferably set between 1 millibar and 2 relative bar, so that they
can be adsorbed on the metal. In station 13 instead a controlling step is carried
out of the crystalline structure, for example by computing a physical property,
such as thermal conductivity, electric conductivity, or refraction index, in order to
establish the nature of clusters of the crystals deposited on the substrate 3;
20 preferably, furthermore, a thickness control is carried out of the crystal layer and
of the cluster surface density.
Figure 18 represents diagrammatically a device 80 that comprises a single
closed casing 90, in which a section for preparing an active core 1 of the type
shown in Fig. 17 and a reactor 50 are enclosed, thus preserving the core from
25 contamination, in particular from gas that is distinct from hydrogen during the
time between the step of depositing the clusters and the step of triggering the
reactions.
The foregoing description of a specific embodiment will so fully reveal the
invention according to the conceptual point of view, so that others, by applying
30 current knowledge, will be able to modify and/or adapt for various applications
such an embodiment without further research and without parting from the
invention, and it is therefore to be understood that such adaptations and
modifications will have to be considered as equivalent to the specific
embodiment. The means and the materials to realise the different functions
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 26 -
described herein could have a different nature without, for this reason, departing
from the field of the invention. It is to be understood that the phraseology or
terminology employed herein is for the purpose of description and not of
limitation.
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 27 -
CLAIMS
1. A method for producing energy by nuclear reactions between hydrogen
and a metal, said method providing the steps of:
— prearranging a determined quantity of crystals of a transition metal,
5 said crystals arranged as micro/nanometric clusters having a
predetermined crystalline structure, each of said clusters having a number
of atoms of said transition metal less than a predetermined number of
atoms;
— bringing hydrogen into contact with said clusters;

10 	- 	heating said determined quantity of clusters up to an adsorption
temperature larger than a predetermined critical temperature, and causing
an adsorption into said clusters of hydrogen as H- ions, after said heating
step said hydrogen as H- ions remaining available for said nuclear
reactions within said active core;
15 	- 	triggering said nuclear reactions between said hydrogen as H- ions
and said metal within said clusters by an impulsive action on said active
core that causes said H- ions to be captured into respective atoms of said
clusters, said succession of reactions causing a production of heat;
— removing heat according to a determined power from said active core
20 	 and maintaining the temperature of said active core above said critical
temperature.
2. A method according to claim 1, wherein said step of prearranging is carried
out in such a way that said determined quantity of crystals of said transition
metal in the form of micro/nanometric clusters is proportional to said
25 	 power.
3. A method according to claim 1, wherein said step of prearranging a
determined quantity of micro/nanometric clusters comprises a step
selected from the group comprised of:
— depositing a predetermined amount of said transition metal in the
30 form of micro/nanometric clusters on a surface of a substrate, i.e. a solid
body that has an a predetermined volume and shape, wherein said
substrate contains on its surface a number of clusters that is larger than a
minimum number, in particular said minimum number at least 109  clusters
10
per square centimetre, preferably at least 10 clusters per square
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 28 -
5
centimetre, more in particular at least 10
11
clusters per square centimetre,
much more in particular at least 10
12
clusters per square centimetre;
— aggregating said determined quantity of micro/nanometric clusters by
sintering, said sintering preserving the crystalline structure of said clusters,
said sintering preserving substantially the size of said clusters;
— collecting into a container a powder that is made of said clusters, i.e.
a determined quantity of clusters or aggregation of loose clusters.
4. A method according to claim 3, wherein said step of depositing said
transition metal is effected by a process of physical deposition on said
10 	substrate of a metal vapour that is made of said metal.
5. A method according to claim 3, wherein said step of depositing said
transition metal is effected by a process selected from the group
comprised of:
— sputtering;
15 	- 	a process comprising evaporation or sublimation and then
condensation on said substrate of said predetermined amount of said
metal;
— epitaxial deposition;
— spraying;
20 	- 	heating up to approaching the melting point followed by slow cooling,
in particular up to an average core temperature of about 600°C,
6. A method according to claim 3, wherein after said step of depositing a
predetermined amount of said transition metal a step is provided of quickly
cooling said substrate and said deposited metal, in order to cause a
25 "freezing" of said transition metal according to clusters having said
crystalline structure, said step of quickly cooling selected from the group
comprised of: tempering; causing a current of hydrogen to flow near said
transition metal as deposited on said substrate, said hydrogen having a
predetermined temperature that is lower than the temperature of said
30 	 substrate.
7. A method according to claim 1, wherein said step of bringing hydrogen into
contact with said clusters is preceded by a step of cleaning said substrate,
in particular by applying a vacuum of at least 10
9
bar at a temperature set
between 350°C and 500°C for a predetermined time, in particular said
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
- 29 -
vacuum applied according to at least 10 vacuum application cycles and
following reinstatement of substantially atmospheric pressure of hydrogen.
8. 	A method according to claim 1, wherein during said step of bringing
hydrogen into contact with said clusters said hydrogen satisfies at least

5 	 one of the following conditions:
— it has a partial pressure set between 0,001 millibar and 10 bar, in
particular between 1 millibar and 2 bar;
— it flows with a speed less than 3 m/s, in particular according to a
direction substantially parallel to said surface of said clusters.
to 9. A method according to claim 1, wherein said adsorption temperature is
close to a temperature of sliding the reticular planes of the transition metal,
in particular a temperature set between the temperature corresponding to
absorption peaks a and p.
10. A method according to claim 1, wherein after said heating step said
15 determined quantity of clusters a step is provided of cooling said active
core up to room temperature, and said step of triggering said nuclear
reactions provides a quick rise of said temperature of said active core from
said room temperature to said adsorption temperature, in particular said
quick rise is carried out in a time that is shorter than five minutes.
20 11. A method according to claim 1, wherein said step of triggering said nuclear
reactions is associated with a step of creating a gradient, i.e. a
temperature difference, between two points of said active core, said
gradient in particular set between 100°C and 300°C, in order to enhance
the anharmonicity of the reticular oscillations and to assist the production
25 	of the H- ions
12. A method according to claim 1, wherein said clusters have a face-centred
cubic crystalline structure, fcc (110).
13. A method according to claim 1, wherein said reactions with production of
heat occur in the presence of a magnetic and/or electric field selected from
30 	 the group comprised of:
— a magnetic induction field of intensity set between 1 Gauss and
70000 Gauss;
— an electric field of intensity set between 1 V/m and 300000 V/m.
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
-30 -
14. A energy generator that is obtained from a succession of nuclear reactions
between hydrogen and a metal, wherein said metal is a transition metal,
said generator comprising:
— an active core that comprises a predetermined amount of said
5 	 transition metal;
- a generation chamber that in use contains said active core;
- a means for heating said active core within said generation chamber
up to a temperature that is higher than a predetermined critical
temperature;
lo 	— 	a means for triggering said nuclear reactions between said transition
metal and said hydrogen;
— a means for removing from said generation chamber the heat that is
developed during said reactions within said active core according to a
determined power,
15 	 characterised in that said active core comprises a determined quantity of
crystals of said transition metal, said crystals being micro/nanometric
clusters that have a determined structure, said clusters comprising on
average a number of atoms of said transition metal that is less than a
predetermined number of atoms.
20 15. A method according to claim 1, wherein said determined quantity of
crystals of said transition metal in the form of micro/nanometric clusters is
proportional to said power.
Triggering
140
Heat production
160
Heating
130
Heat
19
Hydrogen
31
Hydrogen treatment
120
Active core
Impulse of
energy
26
Capture of H" ions and
nuclear reactions 150
owlTransition metal Cluster prearranging
110
Heat removal
170
Produced heat
27
WO 2010/058288

PCT/IB2009/007549
1/8
Fig. 1

;
Sub trate
22

100
Exhaust core
31 HH 23
31
eel
eel
2
37
Sc Zn Ni Co Fe Mn V Ti Cr
Q ,-
Lu Hf Te Re Os Ir Pt Au
104 r
Fig. 4
ro
Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Ag Cd
16
WO 2010/058288 PCT/IB2009/007549
2/8
21
Fig. 2 	23
41

is

O
Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
WO 2010/058288 PCT/IB2009/007549
3/8
43
42
38
38
Me
(b) (c)
E . 7
(60
Fig,8 60 Fig,9
Me
Transition metal
Depositing
113
WO 2010/058288

PCT/IB2009/007549
418
Fig. 10

Fig. 11
Fig. 12
Substrate

Substrate loading
111
Quick
cooling 	119
Surface cluster structure
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
518 Fig. 13
T,°C
Ti 118
600 119
r 	350--
Ta
el.
t
Fig. 14  110
/
113
Subtrate
22
Transition metal
Substrate loading
111
Depositing
113
19
Cleaning
Gas
114
Hydrogen Hydrogen
treatment 120
31
Quick
coo ing 	119
1
Active core
■ %  	 1 .1 L, 	N
irmiiiirmwrwrrrnivmmTru

-.C•X•11.11.11•N•11.1r..•lt.11-.11.N•N•11• N•i•N•i•R•I•Nr.i•••••••11•N.:■El=
.'• r-----
4
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
618
10
WO 2010/058288 	 PCT/1B2009/007549
80 50
/
7/8

1
Fig. 18
2 	 7 	 f
13
Mil 	Hill 	Hill
83 Fig. 19
90
■,,.. 	 .. ..,\..... ........
■...-
---■., .
,..,, .
82
PCT/IB2009/007549 WO 2010/058288
86
818
62
T
61
64
Fig. 24
67
[IL
III•11•N•K•ff 111•111•N 	II II JUN 	ME•  111•••11t 111•11I 	111•• 	AL 11.N.•1
AT
11■1 I cnvim I RJIIPIL. 	cruriLai ricrurs I
International application No
PCT/IB2009/007549
A. CLASSIFICATION
G21B3/00
OF SUBJECT MATTER
INV.
ADD.
According to International Patent Classification (IPC) or to both national classification and IPC
B. FIELDS SEARCHED
Minimum documentation searched (classification system followed by classification symbols)
G21B
Documentation searched other than minimum documentation to the extent that such documents are included in the fields searched
Electronic data base consulted during the international search (name of data base and, where practical, search terms used)
EPO -Internal, WPI Data, 	INSPEC
C. DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED TO BE RELEVANT
Category' Citation of document, with indication, where appropriate, of the relevant passages Relevant to claim No.
Y
Y
WO 95/20816 Al (FOCARDI SERGIO [IT]; HABEL
ROBERTO [IT]; 	PIANTELLI FRANCESCO [IT])
3 August 1995 (1995-08-03)
cited in the application
the whole document
DE 40 24 515 Al (PHILBERTH KARL [DE];
PHILBERTH BERNHARD [DE])
20 February 1992 (1992-02-20)
column 2, 	line 32 - line 56
column 3, 	line 68 - column 4, 	line 10
column 4, 	line 58 - line 65
column 5, 	line 7 - line 36
claims 	2,3,6,17,20
1-3,5-8,
13-15
1-3,5-8,
13-15
documents are listed in the continuation of Box C. annex. X 	Further X 	See patent family
' 	Special categories of cited documents :
"T" later document published after the international filing date
A" document defining the general state of the art which is not
or priority date and not in conflict with the application but
to understand the principle or theory underlying the considered to be of particular relevance 	 invention
"E" earlier document but published on or after the international 	 "X" document of particular relevance; the claimed invention
filing date 	 cannot be considered novel or cannot be considered to
"L" document which may throw doubts on priority claim(s) or 	 involve an inventive step when the document is taken alone
which is cited to establish the publication date of another "Y" document of particular relevance: the claimed invention
citation or other special reason (as specified) 	 cannot be considered to involve an inventive step when the
"0" document referring to an oral disclosure, use, exhibition or 	 document is combined with one or more other such docu-
other means 	 ments, such combination being obvious to a person skilled
"P" document published prior to the international filing date but 	 in the art.
later than the priority date claimed 	 "&" document member of the same patent family
Date of the actual completion of the international search
13 April 	2010
Date of mailing of the international search report
22/04/2010
Name and mailing address of the ISA/
European Patent Office, P.B. 5818 Patentlaan 2
NL - 2280 HV Rijswijk
Tel. (+31-70) 340-2040,
Fax: (+31-70) 340-3016
Authorized officer
Capostagno, 	Eros
Form POT/ISA/210 (second sheet) (April 2005)
page 1 of 2
11111 Gr111/1 I IIJIIML. JG/41-11,1-1 ncrlari I
International application No
PCT/IB2009/007549
C(Continuation), 	DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED TO BE RELEVANT
Category* Citation of document, with indication, where appropriate, of the relevant passages Relevant to claim No .
A
A
A
A
AZONANO TECHNOLOGY: 	"Fuel Cell, 	Energy
Storage and Solar Energy Applications for
Nanomaterials and Nanoparticles"
INTERNET ARTICLE, 	[Online]
2 August 2005 (2005-08-02), pages 1-7,
XP002551718
Retrieved from the Internet:
URL:HTTP://WWW.AZONANO.COM/DETAILS.ASP?ART
ICLEID=1339>
[retrieved on 2009-10-20]
page 3, 	last paragraph - page 4, paragraph
1
JASON STAIRS: 	"CLUSTER"
NANOWORD NET, 	[Online]
25 February 2007 (2007-02-25), XP002551719
Retrieved from the Internet:
URL:http://web.archive.org/web/20070225054
718/http://www.nanoword.net/library/defgen
/generate.php?termid=146>
[retrieved on 2009-10-20]
the whole document
PHILLIPS J C: 	"Heuristic model 	for
hydrogen chemisorption on transition metal
clusters"
JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS,
vol. 	84, 	no. 	3,
1 February 1986 (1986-02-01), pages
1951-1952, 	XP008113612
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS, NEW YORK,
NY, 	US
ISSN: 	0021-9606
the whole document
WO 96/35215 Al (MASSACHUSETTS INST
TECHNOLOGY [US])
7 November 1996 (1996-11-07)
page 4, 	line 15 - line 23
page 24, 	line 24 - line 29
1,14
1,14
1,14
1,14
Form PCT/ISA210 (continuation of second sheet) (April 2005)
page 2 of 2
INTERNATIONAL SEARCH REPORT
Information on patent family members
International application No
PCT/I82009/007549
Patent document
cited in search report
Publication
date
Patent family
member(s)
Publication
date
WO 9520816 Al 	03-08-1995 AT 180918 T 15-06-1999
AU 691242 B2 14-05-1998
AU 1589095 A 15-08-1995
BG 100797 A 30-09-1997
BR 9506650 A 02-09-1997
CA 2182102 Al 03-08-1995
CN 1139990 A 08-01-1997
CZ 9602226 A3 16-07-1997
DE 69510056 D1 08-07-1999
DE 69510056 T2 03-02-2000
EP 0767962 Al 16-04-1997
ES 2133732 T3 16-09-1999
Fl 963010 A 29-07-1996
HU 76408 A2 28-08-1997
IT SI940001 Al 27-07-1995
JP 9508212 T 19-08-1997
NZ 279311 A 25-03-1998
PL 315654 Al 25-11-1996
RU 2155392 C2 27-08-2000
SK 97896 A3 09-07-1997
DE 4024515 Al 	20-02-1992 JP 6324167 A 25-11-1994
WO 9635215 Al 	07-11-1996 AU 2465595 A 21-11-1996
Form PCT/ISA/210 (paten) family annex) (April 2005)
