Journal of Fusion Energy, Vol. 10, No. I, i991
Panel Discussion
Cold Fusion: What  Do We Know? What  Do We Think?
Remarks of Lawrence B. Rees a
For several years, Steven Jones of Brigham Young
University has actively led a group of researchers in the
study of muon-catalyzed fusion. Recently, we have also
begun an investigation of the sort of cold fusion which
has come to be known as solid-state or table-top fusion.
This statement is an overview of the current status of
research at BYU in both of these areas.
The process of muon-catalyzed fusion is illustrated
in Fig. 1. A muon, created by the decay of a pion pro-
duced by a particle accelerator, is introduced into a target
chamber containing deuterium and tritium. The muon is
first captured by either a deuteron or a triton. If it is
captured by a deuteron, it is quickly transferred to the
more massive triton where it is more tightly bound. The
triton-muon system is then readily attracted to a hydro-
gen molecule. Since a muon is very similar to an electron
except in its mass, which is about 200 times heavier,
the muon will form a complex with a deuteron and a
triton which is about 200 times smaller than a normal d-
t molecule. This d-t-muon complex then serves the same
role as a positive hydrogen ion in a normal hydrogen
molecule. It happens that the d-t-muon-d and d-t-muon-
Fig. 1. Chief channels for px-in a D-T target.
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Brigham Young University,
Provo, Utah 84602.
111
t mesomolecules form very readily because of a reso-
nance condition wherein the energy released in the me-
somolecular  formation is readily absorbed by the
production of excited molecular states. And once a me-
somolecule forms, fusion occurs rapidly because the dis-
tance between the deuteron and triton bound by the muon
is sufficiently small to make penetration of the potential
barrier easy. The deuteron and triton then fuse to form
an alpha particle and a neutron, the muon usually being
left free to catalyze another fusion reaction.
Unfortunately, the lifetime of the muon is only about
2.2 microseconds. If a muon lasted forever, all our en-
ergy problems would be solved. But since it doesn't, we
have to try to get as many fusions as we can from each
muon before it decays.
It turns out that the muon lives long enough to pro-
duce more than enough fusions for energy output, but
there is another problem which plagues us at this point.
Some fraction of the time, typically less than 1%, the
negatively-charged muon ends up sticking to the pos-
itively-charged alpha. If that happens, the muon usually
remains bound until it decays, and is hence removed
from the catalysis cycle.
Over the years, a number of experiments have mea-
sured the fusion rate as a function of such variables as
temperature, density, and the ratio of deuterium to tri-
tium. If the density of the d-t mixture is 1.2 times liquid
hydrogen density, about 150 fusions per muon have been
observed.1 This is certainly a sizable number. However,
it costs a lot to make muons since a particle accelerator
is required. So even though you can get a lot of energy
out of a singIe muon, it takes too much energy to pro-
duce the muons to be efficient for energy production.
In order to have energy breakeven, we probably
need on the order of a few thousand fusions per muon.
So we are really not near breakeven at this time.
There are, however, several research efforts which
are proceeding. Target cells are currently being designed
to increase the range of temperature and pressure where
data have been taken. A target cell recently has been
built which will allow pressures up to about 10,000 at-
mospheres. We hope to be able to actually do some
experimentation with this target next spring or summer.
0164-0313/91/0300-0Ili$06.50i0 9 1991 Plenum Publishing Corporation
112 Rees
Hopefully, this will give us new insight into the density
dependence of the fusion process. That, in turn, may
lead theorists to a better understanding of the details of
the mechanism involved. The highest density at which
we've currently taken data is 1.2 times liquid hydrogen
density. This new cell will allow us to measure fusion
rates at about 2.3 times liquid hydrogen density. We
probably don't have a good enough theory to accurately
predict what will happen, but doing simple linear ex-
trapolation, we might expect as many as about 300 fu-
sions per muon at those densities. It's not clear that it
will produce that many, but it's probably not likely that
we'll have a substantially larger number either. So it is
still improbable that we'll be in the range which is useful
for energy production. 1
The real problem to increased energy output is the
matter of the sticking of muons to alpha particles. At
this time, we don't have a complete understanding of
the sticking process. Theoretical estimates differ some-
what from the data, but both experiments and theory
suggest that there is about 0.2-0.7 percent sticking. (1)
Occasionally, nature helps us out by breaking a muon
off from the alpha particle which has trapped it. This is
called regeneration. Regeneration occurs naturally to some
extent. We don't understand this process as well as we'd
like either, there still being a considerable difference
between experimental and theoretical values.
In the end, what we need to do is to reduce sticking
and to increase regeneration. However, there are no ob-
vious ways to do either at this time.
One last thing that might make the whole process
feasible is a cheaper method of producing muons than
the methods we currently have. This causes us to be
somewhat pessimistic right now about the future status
of muon-catalyzed fusion. Though, of course, research
is still being done, we seem to be more or less at a
standstill. And were likely to remain at a standstill unless
future experiments produce something that's quite sur-
prising.
Because of this situation, Steve Jones started look-
ing more seriously into new areas of fusion research
which he and others had considered previously.
Paul Palmer of our physics department, who hap-
pens to do a little teaching of geology on the side, wasn't
particularly satisfied with the geologists' explanation of
the earth's heat source. In pursuing this subject, he dis-
covered that in regions of the earth's crust which are
being subducted under other sections of the crust--and
hence where you have a great deal of volcanic and geo-
thermal activity--the ratio of helium-3 to helium-4 is
about three orders of magnitude larger than it is over the
continental crust. That made him wonder where the he-
lium-3 was coming from. One of the possible sources
of helium-3, of course, is fusion.
Certainly, there is water in the compounds forming
the rocks being subducted under the earth's crust, and
in this water there will naturally be found some deuter-
ium. So d-d fusion could possibly occur.
Further geological evidence is provided by tritium
levels in the atmosphere. During an eruption of Mauna
Ulu, a side crater of Kilauea, a substantial tritium con-
centration was observed at a station near the volcano. In
the subsequent period of time, the volcano died down
for a while and the tritium level subsided. Then during
another period of activity, the leveI of tritium increased
again (see Fig. 2). (2)
It's not completely clear that fusion really has any-
thing to do with the geological activity, but it was a
tantalizing suggestion to do some experiments in that
regard.
The idea basically was to get deuterium into a crys-
tal lattice so we could see if we could somehow induce
fusion in a solid. When we asked chemists how to do
this, they suggested that the easiest way is by electrol-
ysis. It turns out that if you take certain metals, such as
nickel, titanium, and palladium, you can get about the
same number hydrogen atoms in the material as there
are metal atoms. If there is one atom of hydrogen per
one atom of metal, this is equivalent to several liquid
hydrogen densities. If you're busy building expensive
high pressure chambers to increase hydrogen density,.
it's alluring to realize that the crystal lattice of a solid
100
' i ~ I ' I ' I ' I ' I ' I ' I ' l
90 UIu E r u p t i o n
, o
70 Ul__uu Aotlvit.___.~y
5o
<
4o
I..-
~- 30 . ' r  1 9 7 6  H a w a i i
20 0.5
lo l t
M a r c h  1 H - B o m b  T e s t
o i L i l i 1 I I i I I I l I l I , I
4 0  8 0  1 2 o  1 6 o  2 0 0  2 4 0  2 s o  3 2 0  3 s o
DAY O F  Y E A R
Fig. 2. Measurements of tritium in the atmosphere from various mon-
itoring stations, correlated with volcanic eruptions of Mauna Utu, Ha-
waii.
Cold Fusion 113
can accomplish the same thing quite easily. Of course,
it should be acknowledged that if hydrogen molecules
dissociate and the atoms occupy interstices in adjacent
lattice sites, the atoms are farther away than atoms in
hydrogen molecules.
Since the process is easy, we decided to see if any-
thing interesting could be detected. So we just attached
some simple DC power supplies to electrodes made of
various materials such as titanium, palladium, and so
forth. Then we put these electrodes in glass jars con-
taining electrolytes and did some straightforward elec-
trolysis. The hard part, however, was to detect fusion
products at very low levels.
When Paul Palmer originally came up with the idea
of fusion occuring in the earth, almost 3 years ago, he
suggested that the neutrons produced in d-d fusion should
be detectable. So he and his colleagues took the detectors
they had available at the time and looked for neutrons.
Unfortunately, the detectors weren't good enoug to pro-
duce any conclusive results. Sometimes there seemed to
be a signal, and sometimes not. So the idea was tabled
until some better detectors were available.
In the meantime, Bart Czirr and Gary Jensen of our
department were in the process of developing neutron
spectromeeters. So when Steve Jones revitalized interest
in solid-state fusion, Bart and Gary used their latest de-
tector to look for neutrons. This detector operates in a
fairly simple manner. (3) It contains plates of lithium glass
surrounded by a liquid scintillator. The liquid scintillator
serves to moderate the neutrons, giving off light in the
process. Once the neutrons have slowed down to thermal
energies, they're absorbed in the lithium-6 glass which
also scintillates.
In order to get an acceptable event, one signal from
the liquid scintillator must be followed by one signal
from the glass. The pulse shapes from the liquid and
glass are quite different and hence can be easily distin-
guished. Since the glass is insensitive to radiation other
than neutrons, we can be fairly certain that a neutron
has stopped in the detector whenever both signals are
present. So it's a very good detector to discriminate against
most kinds of background. In the mode of operation used
at that time, about three-fourths of all background events
were cosmic ray neutrons.
But we also can get a measurement of the neutron
energy by determining the total light output of the liquid
scintillator. It is not a very accurate spectrometer when
compared to charged particle detectors, but it does give
a rough measurement of neutron energy. The energy can
be calibrated by means of neutrons produced by our
4-MeV Van de Graaff accelerator.
The background spectrum is seen in Fig. 3. It was
266 -
186
IG0
140
120
166
m BO
z
o ~ 60
20
6 o 40 86 126 IGB 200 240 280 B20 3G@ 400
CHFINNEL
Fig. 3. Background spectrum with least-squares fit to the data (solid
line) as described in the text.
90
BB
70
SB
50
i46
30
20
t6
0 46 80 126 IBO 200 246 2B6 320 3G0 400
CHRNNEL
Fig. 4. Foreground spectrum with least-squares fit to the background
(solid line) superimposed.
very constant over time. We never saw any variations
in the shape of the background.
The foreground data (Fig. 4) show, however, a def-
inite peak above the background. This peak is located
at the region where we would expect to see the 2.5-MeV
neutrons from d-d fusionJ 4)
In our best analysis of these data to date we fit the
background with a three-parameter function of the form
A/(x 2 + Bx + C). One parameter provides the normali-
zation and the other two the shape. The fit is excellent,
as can be seen in Fig. 3. For the foreground signal, we
used exactly the same shape parameters but added to
that of a Gaussian peak. Again the fit is excellent, with
114 Rees
the significance of the peak being five to six standard
deviations.
So we might ask then, what causes this peak? The
statistical significance of the peak suggests that it cannot
simply be random fluctuations in the background. The
detector is a good enough detector that we are convinced
that the peak must be neutrons. The energy calibration
tells us the neutrons have an energy of about 2.5 MeV.
That's a pretty good signature for fusion, at least better
than a lot we've seen in the news lately. Even then, we
tried to do a number of things to be sure of our results.
The first thing we checked was to see that the spec-
trum in the regions to the side of the peak matched the
background signals in magnitude and shape. That it did.
We then tried looking at cells identical to those
which produced the peak, but with no current flowing.
We got exactly the same results as the background runs
in both magnitude and shape. We tried the process again
with light water and with current in the cells. Again we
had the same results as the background runs. The back-
ground shape, in fact, always seemd to remain constant,
even with changes of cosmic ray flux and solar activity
during that period of time.
We never could do anything to reproduce the peak,
except during the runs where we had deuterium and cur-
rent both at the same time in the cells. So at this time
we believe the peak to be a genuine signature for fusion.
It should be emphasized that the rate of fusion is
very low. The foreground spectrum was accumulated
over a period of several days. We should also emphasize
that this was not a carefully outlined experiment. It was
rather a survey to see if an experimental program should
be undertaken. We used different electrode materials,
different electrolytes, and even a little different elec-
tronic configuration for some data than other data. Now,
we need to do some serious research to follow up that
initial survey.
One thing we have done very recently has been to
perform similar experiments in collaboration with a group
at Los Alamos. (s~ The detectors that were used, how-
ever, were helium-3 proportional counters. These counters
are very good for discriminating against anything but
neutrons; however, they don't have energy information
available.
In the electrolysis data, the foreground signal was
generally, within statistical uncertainty, at the same level
as the background. There did, however, appear to be a
time dependence to the fusion rate. This is consistent
with results of the BYU experiment. We usually would
see no counts above background for about an hour after
the electrolysis began. After that, we saw a fair number
of counts above background for a period of time. Later
on the signal seemed to go away again, perhaps because
of corrosion of the electrodes.
In any case, if there is an indication of fusion, it is
at a very low rate. It is estimated that there are no more
than about 0.8 neutron produced per second. At BYU,
we estimated the fusion rate to be about 0.6 per second.
We probably can't take the Los Alamos electrolysis data
as clear evidence of fusion, as there are certain weak-
nesses to this experiment. The detectors can't discrimi-
nate between lower energy and higher energy neutrons.
Most of the background comes from cosmic ray neutrons
and the helium-3 counters can do nothing to differentiate
cosmic ray neutrons from 2.5-MeV neutrons.
But another aspect of this experiment was very in-
teresting. With the same experimental configuration,
multiplicities of neutrons within a time window of about
150 microseconds were monitored. It seems that period-
ically a number of neutrons were emitted in a single
burst, about 53 in one burst and roughly half that in two
other bursts.
To compare this result to background, the cells were
removed at a certain point in time. The background seems
to be quite flat with no bursts occurring when the cells
were removed.
It should also be noted that these data are quite
recent, so the analysis is still preliminary.
Another method of inducing fusion was originally
tried by a group at Frascati in Italy. Rather than using
electrolysis, they loaded deuterium under pressure and
at liquid nitrogen temperatures in certin metals, and then
looked for fusion events as the samples were slowly
heated.
This idea was also tried at Los Alamos, and again
there were bursts about 50 neutrons within a time range
of about 150 microseconds (see Fig. 5). Sometimes no
events were observed in given samples. Sometimes it
required several heating and cooling cycles before any
neutron bursts were seen.
It's hard to say exactly what's happening, but it's
interesting to note that the neutron bursts usally occurred
at a temperature of about -30~ It is postulated that
this might have something to do with a phase transition
in the material but there isn't any clear evidence of that
yet.
Using the same pressure-loading method, the total
neutron event rate also seems to be in substantial excess
of the background. And again, as is seen n Fig. 6, when
data were taken with a dummy cell, nothing was ob-
served over background levels. Preliminary analysis of
these data indicates that the neutron signal is significant
at a level of 11 standard deviations.
Cold Fusion t15
70
6 0 -
50-
40-
30-
20-
10-
0 -
-10
70
613-
5 0 -
4 0 -
3 0 -
20 -
10-
0 -
-10
0
TIME CORRELATED COUNTING DATA FOR SAMPLE "H-1
CyellP,3 4/30/89
..... II .......................................................
I I [ I
Cycle-3 Dummy 4130/89
II..@II .o...o~. e...s .@. e . ...........................................
1 2 3 4 5 0
r~me =fl~ ~ of w ~v,,.up, houri
Cyr162 (~mmy 4/30/89
. l )  . i . .  e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I I I I
1 2 3 4 5
'tirol =tim =tart of w,~.,r houri
Fig .  5 .  Burst events from pressure loaded titanium.
0.48
0.46
r
0.44
==
O 0.42
O
IM
'~ 0.40 =r
0.38
0.36
0.34
~SI~4 II-I C'/CIs )OI~LS 4/28/89
t
t
11"1
1 0
[
[
,I!it{tttt
I
I
] .... I [ I [ I
15 0 5 10 15 20  25
H O U R S
Fig .  6. Total events from pressure loaded titanium in comparison
with events from a dummy cell.
How does all this occur? We don't really know.
There are basically a couple of ideas people have had.
One is what Steve Jones likes to call piezonuclear
fusion--pressure bringing particles closer together and
causing fusion to occur. The lattice provides the source
of pressure in this case. Fusion then would likely occur
at a regular rate rather than in bursts. The rate would
also depend strongly on the reduced mass of the system,
I014
I0 I3.
I0 ~
10:
100'
10"
1,0'
0.I'
~O~_D NUCLEAR F U S I O N ~
PubtNacd or R~pormd at Scientific Me,tings
-100 Table prepared by Steven E. Jones in late May, 1989.
Neumln ~ r a e ~  are shown unless otherwise indicated.
-I0 ~ "Excessl-l~"
-l
-0.1
-10- 3
-10. 5
9 ,,~--,.--. - ]Ar~ for "c,~ori~,"
.10-7
u . ~ g n h
.10-9
"I0 "It _ ~  ~ o a
OX~t rnte) (l~"at)
.,~, R=~%_.k _..L
m~ LBL PPPL
BYU - -  "
yale Bugey-
Frejus
.10.17
*Report 5-hour 'spike,' seen of~e
**Stated: doc$ not ol.lr~dic~ Jorle$ ~J~l.
Fig .  7.  Cold nuclear fusion measurement.
so we would expect to see the p-d fusion rate to be
greater than the d-d rate and that to be greater than the
d-t rate. That is, the lower the mass, the shorter the
distance is between the particles and the greater is the
fusion rate.
The other idea is what is called fractal fusion. This
is an idea conceived by a collaboration from Los Alamos
and Washington. This explanation is based @on the fact
that in Washington it has been noticed that charge can
collect across fractures in materials so as to produce
large electric fields in the fracture. It is thought that in
the process of heating and cooling, such fractures could
develop. The field then might be strong enough to ac-
celerate deuterons across the fissure to produce hot fu-
sion locally. So if that's true, it's not really a cold fusion
process after all. In this case, we would expect to see
bursts rather than a continuous fusion process and, as
happens with hot fusion, the d-t rate would be greater
than the d-d rate.
The experimental evidence suggetss that we have
both bursts and a continuous fusion process at the same

time, so we can't draw any conclusions yet.
This system hasn't been well studied at this time,
116 Rees
so we don't know really what is happening. Certainly
other explanations are likely to be forwarded. It should
be noted that a number of researchers at BYU, Frascati,
Los Alamos, etc., have observed fusion rates compara-
ble to the BYU level of 0.6 neutrons per second in sam-
ples of roughly the same size. The current experimental
status of cold fusion is illustrated in Fig. 7.
In regard to Pons and Fleischmann, we simply don't
believe their results to be due to fusion because of the
lack of fusion products. Even if some sort of a new
fusion process were occurring, ther ought to be x-rays
produced. It is hard to believe that you could lose over
20 MeV in a single event and see nothing at all coming
out.
In summary, the current status of solid-state fusion
is that neutrons do seem to be observed at a level of five
or six standard deviations in electrolytic cells, and per-
haps as much as 11 standard deviations with pressure
loading. But the rate is very low, corresponding to a
power output of about 10 -13 watts.
Probably the most interesting aspect of solid-state
fusion is that we really don't know what is going on or
why it's going on. In fact, the most important ramifi-
cations may be in geology rather than in physics. Cer-
tainly, right now we can't make any claims that cold
fusion is likely to have any viability as a power source.
And there are no results yet that lead us to believe that
traditional fusion research should be pursued with any
less vigor than has been undertaken in the past.
REFERENCES
1. S. E. Jones, J. Rafelski, and H. J. Monkhurst, eds. (1989). Muon
Catalyzed Fusion. American Institute of Physics Conference Pro-
ceedings, No. 181.
2. H. G. Ostlund and A. S. Mason. Atmospheric Tritium 1968-1984.
Tritium Laboratory Report No. I4, University of Miami, Miami,
Florida.
3. J. B. Czirr and G. L. Jensen (1989). A Neutron Coincidence Spec-
trometer. BYU Preprint.
4. S. E. Jones et al. (1989). Nature, 338, 737.
5. S. E. Jones (1989). Cold Nuclear Fusion in Condensed Matter:
Recent Results and Open Questions. BYU Preprint.
Journal of Fusion Energy, VoL 10, No. 1, 1991
Remarks of Donald P. Dautovich ~ 3. W O R K  AT ATOMIC ENERGY OF CANADA
LIMITED

1. INTRODUCTION
The announcement on March 23rd from the Uni-
versity of Utah, which reported a demonstration of fu-
sion at room temperature in a test tube, has brought
unprecedented attention to fusion, and worldwide spon-
taneous activity to duplicate the findings. The effect even
reached the business world causing speculation on the
price of palladium, one of the test cell components.
This was followed by widespread reports through
the media of subsequent confirmations, negative results,
and retractions of previous positive results. This period
was characterized by widespread rumor, misinformation
and lack of scientific reporting and review.
Experiments were performed on variants of two dif-
ferent approaches. One approach which could be called
the wet cell, involved electrolysis experiments with a
palladium or titanium cathode and platinum anode in
heavy water solutions. The other approach referred to
here as the dry cell, first used at Frascati in Italy, used
titanium chips in a container, pressurized with deuterium
gas, cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature, and then al-
lowed to warm up. Observations have included mea-
surement of various forms of radiation, tritium, helium,
and heat production.
2. WORK AT UNIVERSITIES AND INDUSTRY
The response in Canada to these events was rapid
as it was elsewhere. The University of Toronto, McGill
University in Montreal, the University of British Colum-
bia, and the University of Alberta all started to do elec-
trochemical or wet cell tests. York University studied
deuterium discharge onto palladium. Alcan and a small
company called Electrofuels also did electrochemical
work. Of this work as of June 1989, only Electrofuels
claimed a temperature increase.
1 Canadian Fusion Fuels Technology Project, 2700 Lakeshore Road
West, Mississauga, Ontario L5J 1K3.
A large effort was initiated at Atomic Energy of
Canada Limited, both at their Chalk River laboratory
and their White Shell Laboratory. They have used the
electrolysis approach with a variety of electrodes and
solutions, including palladium-silver, palladium rod, foil,
sheet, and wire from a variety of sources some in cast
form, basic soIutions, and acid solutions. They have tried
the dry cells with palladium and titanium.
General conditions included sample sizes of 1-10
grams in wet cell tests and 100 grams in dry celt tests.
Wet cells were run at 50-100 mA/cm2 over durations
from days to weeks. Measurements included calorimetry
to 2% accuracy, neutrons to low levels, tritium both in
the electrolyte and in the electrode, gammas, protons,
and x-rays, and He-4 in the palladium electrode. All
results have not been different from background.
4. W O R K  AT ONTARIO HYDRO
Ontario Hydro also started this work fairly early
and have tried both the dry cell and wet ceil approaches.
The electrochemical work has shown no evidence in ex-
periments designed to detect large scale heat effects.
Efforts are underway to refine the calorimetry.
In the dry cell approach, a cluster of four individual
samples of palladium bars, titanium chips, titanium
sponge, and uranium powder, each individually in a con-
tainer pressurized with deuterium gas, were located around
a helium-3 neutron detection system within a paraffin
moderator block. Initial work has provided evidence of
neutrons above background in repeated cycles using the
original samples. At this time, it has not been determined
which of the samples are responding. These reports are
considered preliminary and subject to additional confir-
mation.
5. CONVINCING RESULTS
117
In reviewing the available information three criteria
may be used to qualify" the reported results and permit
some assessment of the validity of the data. The criteria
used here are that the observations are significantly above
background, that the instrumentation is good and that
0164-0313/91/0300-0117506.50/0 9 I991 Plenum Publishing Corporation
118 Dautovich
the work be documented and available for detailed re~
view and assessment.
On this basis, five different sets of data have been
selected as convincing as shown in Fig. 1. In wet cell
tests, these include the Texas A&M data of Bockris and
co-workers, where excess heat and tritium above back-
ground were reported, Huggins and co-workers at Stan-
ford University reported low levels of excess heat, and
Jones and co-workers at Brigham Young University re-
ported significant neutrons above background.
In dry cell tests, Scarramuzzi and co-workers at
Frascati reported 1000 times background neutron pulses,
and Menlove and co-workers at Los Alamos National
laboratory also found significant neutrons above back-
ground.
6. THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Figure 2 shows the scale of fusion probabilities
comparing the probability for DD fusion at room tem-
perature with the rates implied by selected observations.
Based on these probabilities, it is difficult to accept fu-
sion as an explanation when the probability in deuterium
gas is at 10 to the minus 70 and the fusion rates that are
implied by these various results are 10 to the minus 20
100
10 -1C
10 -2s
- 3 (  --
10
1 0 - 4 (  --
1 0 - 5 0 - -
1 0 - 6 0 - -
10-70--
DT fusion in tokamak plasma at 10 keV
DD fusion in Pd lattice at RT
(based on F-P/Texas/Stanford heat output)
DD fusion in tokamak plasma at 10 keV
DD fusion in DDu molecule at RT
DD fusion in Ti/Pd lattice at RT
(based on Jones/LANL/Frascati neutron yield)
HD fusion in HD molecule at RT
DD fusion in D2 molecule at FIT
Fig. 2. Fusion probabilities (/DD/s).
Wet  (electrochemical cells)
TEXAS A&M:
- 10% excess heat
- 1000 x T background
~ No excess He-3/-4 in electrodes
STANFORD U.
- 10-20% excess heat
JONES
- 3 x background n in Utah
- repeated under Gran Sasso (Italy)
Dry (high pressure D2):
FRASCATI
- 1000 x background n pulses
LANL
- 100 x background n pulses
Fig. 1. "Cold fusion" convincing results.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS:
- Chemical bond energies (-2 to +7 eV/Pd)
- Hydriding energy (+0.4 eV/Pd2H)
- Cor ros ion  (+0.9 eV/PdO)
- Li or other alloying energies
- Phase change (-0.2 eV/Pd to melt)
MECHANICAL LA'r-I-ICE ENERGY:
- Dislocations in deformed metal (<0.4 eV/Pd)
- Surface energy (free or g.b.)
INTEGRAL I*(V-1.54) STORED IN LAFFICE
- 1 day incubation ( t 0  eV/Pd)
IN-SITU RECOMBINATION:
- 10% in-situ recomb (0.1 W/mL)
Fig. 3. Chemistry-based explanations.
for the titanium in the Jones and the Frascati experiments
and around 10 to the minus 8 or 10 for the Pons and
Fleischman observations.
Figure 3 shows a variety of chemistry-based reac-
tions and corresponding energies that could account for
Cold Fusion 119
those experiments showing low levels of excess heat.
Included are energies related to palladium bonding, hy-
driding, lithium alloying with palladium, lattice defor-
mation, stored energy, and recombination.
Attempts have been made to consider variations
which might affect nuclear-based explanations. These
have included examining the effect on tunneling caused
by changing the effective mass or charge of the electron,
reducing the lattice spacing of deuterium by a factor of
2, incident cosmic ray muons and high pressure deuter-
ium in microvoids. While as a theoretical exercise, the
probabilities may be raised there is difficulty in describ-
ing known processes which could cause such changes to
the physical properties.
Other attempted explanations have included a hot
fusion cascade initiated by the high energies associated
with electrical charge built up on the sides of a crack or
deposited by cosmic rays.
7. SUMMARY
Considering the experiments which have been listed
as convincing in Fig. 1, two groups have provided evi-
dence for the existence of an unidentified small heat
source. The low level of heat that is produced in the
Texas A&M and Stanford work, can most plausibly be
explained by a chemical explanation. The absence of
helium and neutrons is consistent with this explanation,
however, the high tritium level observed by Texas A&M
is not.
In the dry cell tests two groups present good evi-
dence for an unidentified small neutron source. The best
guess for an explanation may be hot fusion cascade. In
our opinion, there is really no convincing case yet for
nuclear fusion, certainly not of any practical value, but
there seems to be a real effect and it has to yet be iden-
tified.
There are far more groups with good equipment
who found no effect at all. There may be some possible
reasons for that, but there is certainly no clear reason
for it. We think that the evidence suggests that more
work is appropriate. We think that funding should be
commensurate with the understanding of this phenome-
non and of its possible usefulness.

Journal of  Fusion Energy, Vol. 10, _No. 1, 1991
Remarks  of  Rulon K.  Linford 1
After the detailed summaries given by the previous
speakers, I will just give some general thoughts about
where we are.
The conference that was held in Santa Fe a week
or so ago was a very timely event. Before the confer-
ence, a lot of people had called me wondering about the
appropriateness of the conference because it was sched-
uled such a short time following several other meetings
on cold fusion. Dr. Gajewski (Director of Advanced En-
ergy Projects, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, DOE)
had called me and asked us to hold the conference. I
think that his ideas regarding the purpose and timing of
the conference were sound and were borne out by what
happened at the conference.
The purpose was to get the people representing the
full spectrum of expertise of those working on cold fu-
sion together so they could talk about their work in a
more scientific atmosphere for a period of a few days,
and to draw from that interaction the necessary infor-
mation that would allow more efficient scientific prog-
ress. Certainly we were not expecting that major

conclusions regarding cold fusion would result from the
conference itself. However, we did expect that the con-
ference might foster more focused research activities and
cooperative efforts between various research groups. I
believe it accomplished those purposes very well. We
are pleased with the outcome of that conference.
Table I is my summary of the observations to date.
It lists the type of experiments in which excess heat and
possible fusion products have been measured. The types
Type
Table I. Observations
Equivalent Pressurized D2
power Electrolysis gas (Pd + Ti
(watts) Pd Ti mixture)
Excess heat 10-z-10 X
Neutrons: < 10 -s
Random X
Bursts Mixture
Tritium < 10 -3 X
3He, 4He, y 0
X X
X
t Los Alamos National Laboratory, Controlled Thermonuclear Divi-
sion, P.O. Box 1663, MS E529, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545.
121
of experiments include electrolysis, or the so-called wet
cells, and the dry pressurized gas cell experiments.
As pointed out by previous speakers, the reported
excess heat has ranged from the tens of milliwatts up to
several watts, depending on the sizes of the electrodes,
etc.
Neutron measurements of both random single-neu-
tron events and correlated burst events have been re-
ported. The term "burst" sometimes is used to describe
events that are minutes or hours long, as in the case of
the Frascati pressurized D 2 results. However, that is not
what I mean by this term in Table I. Measurements at
Los Alamos have identified bursts of neutrons that came
out within a window of about 100 microseconds. These
neutrons are probably emitted in a time much smaller
than that. The characteristics of the detector prevent the
narrowing of the measurement window much below 100
microseconds. The helium-3 detector uses polyethylene
for a moderator. Even if, say, 100 neutrons were emitted
within a nanosecond, they must be thermalized by the
moderator before they are detected in the helium-3 tubes.
This slowing down process spreads the detection of the
neutrons in time with a characteristic width of about 50
microseconds. The overall efficiency of the detector would
allow up to 33 of the 100 neutrons to be counted in the
128 microsecond window. This type of detector has been
used to detect both bursts and random single-neutron
events in both electrolysis and pressurized gas type ex-
periments.
Table I points out a large discrepancy between the
amount of excess heat reported and the equivalent num-
ber of watts that would be consistent with the measure-
ments of fusion products. This is particularly true of the
neutron output, either in the random mode or the burst
mode. The measurement that comes closest to being con-
sistent with the heat is the amount of tritium reported by
Bockris (Texas A&M), which is still too low by at least
an order of magnitude.
As Keith Thomassen pointed out, this tritium was
obtained from cells where the calorimetry had not been
done, and in the case of the Srinivasan-Appleby (Texas
A&M) work, where they have measured the excess heat
in a rather careful calorimeter, a check for tritium and
helium was made but none was found.
With regard to helium and gammas, I am not aware
of anybody that is now claiming a positive measurement.
If there are any contradictions to that statement, I would
be interested to know at this point.
Table II summarizes mechanisms that might explain
0164-0313/91/0300-012i$06.50/0 9 199I Plenum Publishing Corporation
122 Linford
Table II. Possible Mechanisms to Explain Observations
i
Requirements to Explain Observation of:
Mechanism Neutrons Net heat
Cold Reduced nuclear Reduced nuclear
spacing ~ by 5 spacing ~ by 10
and change
branching ratio
by > 10 ~
Hot Cracking yields large  (Branching ratio re-
electric fields ~ quirement not met) b
Other ? ?
" Compared to the 0.74 ~ spacing in the D2 molecule.
b Branching should not change for this mechanism.
the observations. One mechanism, identified as "co ld"
in the table, is based on the increased probability of
fusion due to quantum-mechanical tunneling as the spac-
ing between the nuclei is reduced. The observed neutron
production rate could be explained by reducing by a
factor of 5 the nuclear spacing in the deuterium mole-
cule. In order to explain the amount of net heat, you
have to decrease that spacing by a factor of 10, only
another factor of 2 beyond the amount needed to explain
the neutrons. Even though a difference of many orders
of magnitude exists between the observed neutron rates
and the neutron rates required to be consistent with the
excess heat, in terms of the nuclear spacing, the differ-
ence is only a factor of 2.
The impact of reducing the nuclear spacing has been
well documented in muon-catalyzed fusion research. In
the muonic molecule, the spacing is reduced by 200, 20
times what is needed to yield the amount of excess heat
indicated in Table II. The specific mechanism that might
result in reduced spacing in a solid, like palladium, has
not yet been identified. Several plausibility arguments
have been put forward, but none of these has yet been
developed into a sound self-consistent theory.
Even more difficult to explain than the reduced
spacing is a possible cause for a significant change in
the fusion branching ratio. As indicated in Table II, the
branching ratio would have to change by more than a
million to explain the disparity between neutrons and
excess heat. Again, some ideas have been offered to
explain how this might happen between closely-spaced
deuterium nucIei in a solid lattice, but more detailed
calculations have so far failed to verify these ideas.
A rather different type of mechanism is labeled "hot"
in Table II and has been called the fractile or cracking
mechanism by previous speakers today. In this model,
cracking of the lattice generates large electric fields which,
in turn, accelerate some deuterium nuclei sufficiently to
cause fusion. Because the fusing process associated with
this mechanism is expected to be very similar to the
process in standard hot fusion experiments, one would
not expect that the branching ratio would change. There-
fore, this model is not a plausible mechanism for ex-
plaining the excess heat in the face of such a small neutron
production.
Of course, other possible mechanisms might ex-
plain either the neutrons or the excess heat. Significant
progress could be made to narrow the possible mecha-
nisms by careful but straightforward experiments. These
experiments should focus on finding or ruling out the
existence of fusion products in the amounts ~hat are con-
sistent with the excess heat. These fusion products have
come to be known as the "smoking gun." If the smok-
ing gun does not exist, the mechanism responsible for
the excess heat is not fusion. If the smoking gun is found,
the specific types of products will determine the nature
of the reaction and the branching ratios that must be
explained, thus providing a needed focus for the theo-
retical work.
The reported observation of small numbers of neu-
trons is scientifically intriguing even if the excess heat
does not prove to have nuclear origins. However, more
solid statistics are needed to facilitate research into the
origin of the neutrons. The scientific community would
also feel more comfortable if the observations were more
repeatable and a larger number of people had observed
the same kinds of results.
In the areas of excess heat measurements, it is clear
that the calorimetry that is being done now is more so-
phisticated, and as reported in the conference, continues
to indicate excess heat production. Further improve-
ments are needed, including closing the systems and re-
combining the gases from the electrolyte.

In conclusion, improved collaboration between var-
ious organizations is needed in order to get more work-
ing experiments and to being the best possible diagnostic
tools to bear on the experiments that are producing ex-
cess heat and/or fusion products. Fortunately, such col-
laboration is increasing and should yield important results
in the near future.
Journal of Fusion Energy, Vol. I0, No. 1, 1991
Remarks o f  Keith I. Thomassen ~
After 2 months of intense scrutiny by scientists around
the world, we have taken only the first steps toward
understanding the phenomena that launched our efforts.
I'd like to give my views on what we know, what we

don't know, and what it means. My conclusions are that
an energy source is not likely to be found in cold fusion,
but that some genuine scientific curiosities may have
been uncovered and should be pursued at a more normal

pace. An alternative conclusion is that these phenomena
are not real and the results are a misinterpretation of
measurements near the limits of detectability.
Let me begin by stating what is becoming appar-
ent - tha t  there may be some unexpected heat flow out
of these electrolytic cells and some unexpected neutrons
produced in solid materials under mysterious circum-
stances. Furthermore, I believe these two phenomena are
not connected. As has been widely noted, it is not easy
to reproduce these phenomena, and it may be that we
are in fact observing what Irving Langmuir called "path-
ological science." In a 1953 lecture to the GE Research
& Development Center, he gave six symptoms of path-
ological science, and we can recognize in cold fusion
many of these symptoms (see Table 1). Neutron output
at the limit of detectability, theories of d-d reactions that
are contrary to experience, ad hoc explanations of the
heat by a new form of fusion, and the division of sup-
porters and critics that has changed as events unfolded
are symptoms we have seen.
For over 2 months at LLNL, our work has turned
up no "excess heat" and we have seen no neutrons
above background. Our experience is similar to that of
a large majority of other major institutions, yet these
null results do not disprove assertions made by scientists
who do claim to see these phenomena. My summary
today then is based on observations reported by other
I Lawrence Liverrnore National Laboratory, P.O. Box 808, Liver-
more, California 94550.
123
groups, and in the case of one Texas A&M group on
our work with them.
Starting with the "excess heat"phenomena, it has
been claimed by several groups that the heat flow from
a cell operating in steady state exceeds the heat being
put into the cell by the voltage source driving it. The
definition of heat input taken by all these groups (except
Stanford) is that it is the power from the voItage source
less the amount needed to separate the water molecules
into deuterium and oxygen atoms. The separation power,
1.5 volts times the current, does not appear as heat un-
less the gases recombine and I'm inclined to believe as
do most electrochemists that the recombination heat is
small. If that is the case, we have a scientific mystery
which Pons and Fleischmann claimed had a nuclear so-
lution.
Their speculation (Pons and Fleischmann) is based
on dividing this excess heat among all the deuterium
atoms in the palladium and noting that it amounted to
several hundred electron volts of energy per atom, an
amount that cannot be explained chemically. Among other
conjectures, not nuclear, are the release of energy stored
during the time when the material is not producing ex-
cess heat, insufficient accuracy in the caIorimetry, or
chemical reactions involving many times more atoms
than the deuterium atoms in the lattice.
As for the release of stored energy the proponents
of a positive effect will point to the steady-state output
over times long compared to the charge time. As for
inaccuracy in calorimetry, perhaps the most convincing
case for accuracy has been made by Appleby, Srinivasan
et al. at Texas A&M who in their experiments used a
sophisticated microcalorimeter sensitive to b~-watts of
heat flow. After low current charging for over 40 hours
they increased the total current to 100 mA at 4 1/2 volts
for another 100 hours. The 1 1/2 volts for separating the
water molecule consumes 150 mW of the 450 mW ap-
plied to the cell. For some time after the current was
0164-0313/9110300-0123506.50/0 9 !991 Plenum Publishing Corporation
124 Thomassen
increased the heat output to the calorimeter was a steady
300 mW, but then rose to 340 mW, an "excess" of 40
mW. This excess was not observed with light water or
other cathode material. The 40 mW level was not sus-
tained when NaOD replaced LiOD, but came back when
the NaOD was removed and LiOD put back in. For the
small volume of Pd used in the experiment this heat
translates to about 20 W/cc.
An even more dramatic claim comes from Huggins
at Stanford who reports more heat output by 12% than
the total power into the cell, not subtracting the work of
separation. His results are based not on conventional
calorimetry, but by "calibrating" the cell with an in-
dependent heater. Monitoring the temperature difference
AT between the cell and its bath, a plot of AT with
power is made. For calibration the heater is used; oth-
erwise, the power is the total voltage times the cell cur-
rent. Initially, the slope of this line is less than that
generated during the calibration run, but as the cell runs
for a few days the slope exceeds that of the calibration
run, indicating excess power production over that from
resistive heating. The slope measurement is made at var-
ious times during the experiments and the calibration
repeated throughout. A key issue here is a thorough
analysis of this method as a substitute for calorimetry,
but on the surface it would imply excess heat generation.
Evidence against a nuclear explanation in the Ap-
pleby experiment came from LLNL, where analysis of
the Pd wire showed no helium generation and analysis
of the electrolyte showed no buildup of tritium over the
amount in the original electrolyte. Our method for mea-
suring the 3He content in the Pd is sensitive down to 3
• 105 atoms, three orders of magnitude more sensitive
than equipment used at Rockwell. Since the sample
weighed - 20 mg, the reaction rate is limited to 10-18
D-D neutrons/sec per deuterium atom if the 3He were
accumulated in 100 hours (see Fig. 1). In cells run at
Stanford with purported excess heat, the helium analysis
has not been done, and results of analysis from material
used by Pons and Fleischmann have not been an-
nounced. Another set of cells at Texas A&M, cells not
put into a calorimeter, were sampled at various times
during their operation and substantial tritium buildup was
reported, contrary to the LLNL analysis. This issue needs
to be resolved.
Turning to neutron production, perhaps the most
convincing evidence of room temperature fusion events
comes from the Frascati-type experiments now repeated
at LANL. There, the neutron bursts begin an hour after
warm-up from ~,I 2 temperatures. At that time, the high
pressure gas cylinderswith Ti and Pd materials in them
reach -30~ These bursts give off 10-300 neutrons in
Log R neutrons/sec/D atom
10-4 - -  __
4.6 X 10 "10 - -
9 X 10 "21
10-24
10-74 - -
R = n <ov> for DD @ n = 1014 cm'3= T = 10 eV
Explains(1) 10 W/cc in Pd - -  Srinivasan, Texas A&M
Upper limit(2) from 3He analysis @ LLNL of Srinivasan sample
Measured rate in Ti, Jones (BYU)
Room temperature rate for DT molecule(3)
Notes: (1) Pd ~ 106 g/mole, 12 g/cc ~ 5.5 x 1022 D atoms/cc in 0.8D/Pd
So, 10 W/cc = 5.5 x 1022 x R x 2.5 x 106 eV x 1.6 x 10 "is ~ R = 4.6 x 10 "10
(2} 3 x 105 atom 3He/O.02 g in 100 hr  ~ 500 atom 3He/seclcc Pd
So, 500 atom 3He/sec/cc Pd + 5.5 x 1022 atom D/cc Pd = 9 x 10 "21 events/sec
(3) R ~ 10 +10 when muons catalyze DT molecules
Fig. 1. Fusion reaction rate--cold fusion.
less than 200 ~xs, and the bursts cease as the cylinder
continues to warm up. These experiments are reminis-
cent of the Soviet work by Klyuev et  al. (1~ on high-
energy processes accompanying the fracture of solids.
They observed electric fields between the walls of a
propagating crack on the order of 10 V/cm, and accel-
erating voltages of 100 kV and above as detected from
x-rays with energies > > 50 keV. They also claim a
neutron yield of about 10-11 per deuteron when the ma-
terial (a LiD pellet) is fired against a metal plate and
shattered. Here again there is a valid scientific curiosity
in my view, but the neutron output is so low as to be
uninteresting as a potential energy source. Further, there
are questions being raised concerning spurious signals
generated in the detectors in these experiments. Until
those questions are resolved, one cannot assume the sig-
nals come from neutrons in the samples.
Finally, I'd like to comment on the negative results
from numerous institutions carrying out cold fusion ex-
periments. While such results dominate the reports from
around the world they cannot negate well-documented
positive results. Will the mystery be resolved by finding
the key to replicating the phenomena of excess heat and
neutron production or by finding that the positive results
were in fact, spurious? That is the issue that must be
addressed, and it is likely to require much more time
and care than has been expanded to date.
This work was supported by the auspices of the
U.S. Department of Energy by the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory under contract W-7405-ENG-48.
REFERENCE
1. Klyuev et al. (1986). Soy. Tech. Phys. Lett., 12(11), 551.
