Introduction. –

At suﬃciently low projectile energies an enhancement of the cross-section
for charged-particle–induced nuclear reactions can be observed. This is due to the shielding
of the charges of reacting nuclei by surrounding electrons which leads to an increase of the
Coulomb barrier penetrability and enhances the measured cross-section in comparison to the
bare nuclei case. This eﬀect, known as electron screening, was originally discussed for the dense
plasma in the interior of stars [1], where, due to screening, the nuclear-reaction rates can be
increased by many orders of magnitude. For laboratory thermonuclear reactions, the screening
eﬀect was predicted [2] and experimentally veriﬁed for several light nuclear systems [3].

In the simplest picture, the enhancement of the cross-section results from the gain of
electronic binding energy (called screening energy Ue) which can be transferred to the relative
motion of the colliding nuclei. In an adiabatic limit, i.e. with velocities vnuclear ≪ velectron,
this energy shift can be treated as constant. Consequently, the enhancement factor f deﬁned
as the ratio between the cross-sections for screened and bare nuclei can be calculated as
follows [2]:

where the transformation of the cross-section to the astrophysical S-factor, a weak-energy
dependent function, has been applied; η is the Sommerfeld parameter and E is the CMS
energy. The enhancement factor f is very close to unity for energies E > 100 Ue (for light
nuclear systems Ue is of order 100 eV) and increases exponentially for lower energies.

On the other hand, this energy shift can be easily calculated in the frame of the Born-
Oppenheimer approximation. If the potential energy W(r) between the colliding ions is known,
the screening function Sc(r) may be obtained as a modiﬁcation of the internuclear Coulomb
potential and expanded around r = 0

where Ds is the short-range screening distance.

Consequently, the screening energy stays
independent of the kinetic energy of the colliding system and is given by Ue = Z1Z2e2/Ds.

The experimental investigations of the last decade were focused on gas target studies [3]
which, however, can include only the bound electron contribution to the screening energy.

The experimental and theoretical values for Ue were found to be in reasonable agreement;
discrepancies in some cases could be removed by means of corrections of the projectile stopping
power values [4] or a better understanding of the reaction mechanism in the vicinity of the
reaction threshold [5]. From both d+d fusion reactions 2H(d,p)3H and 2H(d,n)3He, only the
former could so far be experimentally investigated at projectile energies low enough (below
10 keV) to observe the electron screening eﬀect.
The value of the screening energy was
determined in the experiment using a gas target [6] to (25± 5) eV which is very close to the
theoretical value of 20 eV [7].

However, an astrophysically relevant contribution for dense plasmas to the screening en-
ergy arising from unbound, free electrons has not been investigated experimentally so far.
The application of metal hydrides as targets provides a unique possibility to study this con-
tribution in the laboratory. A possible disadvantage of this method are many-body eﬀects
characteristic for dense matter resulting from internuclear correlation processes; but, due to
trapping deuterons by the crystal lattice, these eﬀects can be neglected [8].

In the present work we have studied the screening eﬀect in both d+d fusion reactions on
three diﬀerent deuteron-implanted metallic targets (Al, Zr and Ta) in the deuteron energy
range between 5 and 60 keV [9]. We will show that the screening eﬀect in metallic environments
is much stronger than that for atomic or molecular gas targets and signiﬁcantly stronger than
the appropriate theoretical expectations. Due to the exponential behavior of relation (1), the
increase of the screening energy can cause a drastic enhancement of the nuclear cross-section,
especially in the case of the strong coupled plasma where the average Coulomb potential
energy of ions exceeds their thermal energy.


Experimental set-up.

The experiment has been performed at a cascade accelerator
with a highly stabilized 60 kV power supply. The high voltage corresponding to the beam
energy was measured by a precise voltage divider with an accuracy better than 1 V. Beams
of D+ and D+
2 ions produced in a high-frequency ion source were magnetically analyzed,
focused and additionally deﬂected by about 10 degrees by a magnetic steerer located directly
in front of the target chamber in order to remove neutral particles. Furthermore, a liquid-
nitrogen cooled Cu tube and a plate placed in the beam line and in the target chamber,
respectively, were applied to avoid deposits on the target. The long-term energy stability was
about 10 eV. The beam was focused on the target into a spot of about 1 cm in diameter. All
charged particles (3He, 3H, p) from d+d reactions were detected with four 100 mm2 PIPS-
detectors ﬁxed at laboratory angles of 90◦, 110◦, 130◦ and 150◦ with respect to the beam at
10 cm distance from the target. Al foils of thickness 150 µg/cm2 in front of the detectors
prevented elastically scattered deuterons from entering the detectors. The charge collected

Fig. 1 – Anisotropy coeﬃcient for the (d, p) and (d, n) reactions.
was determined via the measurement of the electric current on the target holder which was
isolated from the target chamber. A negative voltage of 100 V was applied to a surrounding
cylinder box for suppression of secondary electrons. The targets being thick Al, Zr and Ta
foils were implanted up to the saturation level close to the chemical stoichiometry using a
40 keV deuteron beam. The implantation process was monitored by the proton yield of the
2H(d,p)3H reaction. For details refer to [10].


Angular distribution. –

The angular distributions of the 2H(d,p)3H and 2H(d,n)3He re-
actions are expected to be anisotropic even at the lowest projectile energies due to a relatively
large p-wave component in the entrance channel. In the present work an angular distribution
of a nuclear reaction could be measured for the ﬁrst time at a beam energy as low as 5 keV.

Neglecting an L = 2 contribution, the angular distribution being symmetric with respect to
90◦ can be parametrized as A(θ) = 1 + a2 cos2(θ). Our results, presented in ﬁg. 1, are in the
overlapping energy region in good agreement with measurements of Brown and Jarmie [11].

The energy dependence of the parameter a2 for both reactions recommended in ref. [11] could
be conﬁrmed by our results at extremely low energies. We observe no target material depen-
dence of the angular distribution. This means that the screening eﬀect which becomes visible
for beam energies below 25 keV should be equal for both entrance wave function contributions
L = 0 and L = 1 and does not change the relative intensities of both contributions compared
to the gas target experiments. A WKB calculation showed that the L = 1 contribution is
increased only by less than 5% relative to the L = 0 contribution in the case of screening
(Ue = 300 eV). So the parametrization given by Brown and Jarmie can also be applied to the
present experiment.


Thick-target enhancement factor. –

Apart from the angular distribution, we need in-
formation about the distribution of the implanted deuterons in the metallic targets for de-
termining the total reaction rates and, consequently, the enhancement due to the screening
eﬀect. As was shown in [12], stable, homogeneously deuterized target layers can be obtained
at the saturation level of implantation. Nevertheless, the stoichiometric ratio during long-
period measurements can vary slightly.

Therefore, it was necessary to control on-line the
deuteron density in the target. For this purpose the yield of the proton reaction channel has
been continuously determined for all four detectors and stored together with the value of the
beam charge collected in short-time periods. The thick-target angle-integrated reaction yield

Fig. 2 – Reduced yields y(E) over the charge collected at the target determined on-line for Elab = 10
and 25 keV.
including the screening eﬀect can be written as

where Ad, Am, nd and nm are the stopping power coeﬃcients and the number densities for
the implanted deuterons and the metal atoms, respectively.

The stopping power ϵ(E) =
−dE/dx = (ndAd + nmAm)

E is equated with that for protons at the same velocity [13] and
includes the eﬀect of implanted deuterons.

For the evaluation of the experimental thick-target results, it is appropriate to deﬁne the
reduced yield function y

F(E) is the thick-target enhancement factor deﬁned in analogy to the thin-target formula

Due to electron screening, the function y(E) will decrease with increasing E and becomes
the density ratio nd/(ndAd + nmAm) for E ≫ Ue. In ﬁg. 2 the on-line determined values of
y(E) at deuteron energy 10 keV are compared with those achieved for our monitor measure-
ments at 25 keV (i.e. at a CMS energy E0 = 12.5 keV) performed before and after the 10 keV
measurements. The enhancement factor F(E) can be determined from the observed jumps
in the function y(E) which occur between diﬀerent energies but at equal deuteron density,
as exempliﬁed in ﬁg. 2.

Therefore the ratio ynorm(E) = y(E)/y(E0) is equal to the nor-
malized enhancement factor Fnorm(E) = F(E)/F(E0); this normalization makes the analysis
independent of the deuteron density as well as of the stopping power values.


Results. –

Our experimental results for the enhancement of the 2H(d,p)3H reaction yields
investigated in the three metallic materials compared to the bare-nuclei case are presented
in ﬁg. 3. The experimental points, the uncertainties of which include both statistical and
systematic errors (such as beam energy instability and changes in the deuteron density) are

Fig. 3 – Enhancement of the thick-target yields for three diﬀerent metals.
ﬁtted by the function Fnorm(E) using only one parameter, the screening energy Ue. Because
of our normalization, the ﬁtted curves take on unity at the deuteron energy 25 keV.

The 2H(d,n)3He reaction could simultaneously be observed by detecting the 3He recoil
nuclei. The ratio of the total reaction yields of both mirror reactions for the three metal
targets (Al, Zr, Ta) was found to be very close to one, which agrees with the parametrization
of Brown and Jarmie [11] and with the experimental results achieved by Cecil et al. [14] and
by Greife et al. [6].

The values of the screening energies Ue resulting from the ﬁtting procedure described above
are (190±15) eV for Al, (297±8) eV for Zr and (322±15) eV for Ta. They are about one order of
magnitude larger than the value Ue = (25±5) eV determined from a gas target experiment [6].

To exclude systematic errors as reason for such large values of the screening energies, we
discuss in the following the possible sources of systematic uncertainties in detail.

For absolute cross-section measurements at sub-Coulomb energies an accurate knowledge
of the beam energy is of crucial importance. Although the long-time high-voltage stability was
better than 10 eV, the energy spread (FWHM) of the beam was much larger and amounted
to about 150 eV. This value is characteristic for high-frequency ion sources and has been
conﬁrmed in opposite ﬁeld measurements. An additional energy spread arises due to Coulomb
explosion of the molecular D+
2 beam in the target material [15]. For an incident energy below
12 keV this energy spread is less than 100 eV. Assuming a Gaussian distribution for the beam
energy and a constant S-factor over this energy interval, the weighted mean beam energy will
be increased by about 10 eV at Ed,lab = 5 keV and by 7 eV at Ed,lab = 10 keV which is
comparable with the error of the ﬁt for the screening energy and the high-voltage accuracy.
Additionally, the beam energies determined by means of opposite ﬁeld measurements were
systematically lower by about 10 eV than the value provided by the high-voltage divider.
This eﬀect can be explained by the electric potential drop arising in the plasma of the ion
source. This correction has an opposite sign with respect to the correction due to the energy
spread of the beam, so they cancel each other at the lowest projectile energies (< 12 keV)
where we have used the molecular beam.

The next eﬀect which could systematically inﬂuence our experimental results is the pos-
sibility of building up a thin carbon or oxide layer on the target surface. Since the deuteron
density in such a layer is small compared to that achieved for the metal matrix, this eﬀect
reduces the measured reaction yield and corresponds to a smaller jump of the reduced yield
y(E), see ﬁg. 2. Consequently, the experimental value for the screening energy would be too
low. However, the oﬀ-line investigations of the target surfaces by means of Energy-Dispersive
X-ray Micro Spectroscopy (EDX) did not show a signiﬁcant contamination in the area of the
beam spot. Possible deviations of the homogeneity of the deuteron distribution in the metal
matrix can also lead to systematic errors. Due to the strong sputtering process of the metallic
targets, it is likely that the deuteron density close to the target surface could be somewhat
smaller. This, however, leads to a decrease of the determined screening energy in analogy to
the case of a possible carbon-oxygen layer.

Since the last two eﬀects could not be controlled on-line, the determined values for Ue
should rather be treated as lower limits. A strong argument for the screening hypothesis is
provided by the measured energy dependence of ynorm (ﬁg. 3) which can be ﬁtted by Fnorm(E)
using only one ﬁt parameter, i.e. the screening energy Ue. Additionally, the clearly observed
target material dependence of Ue makes it quite unlikely that systematic errors might be
responsible for the observed eﬀects.


Discussion and conclusion. –

The analysis of the experimental data in terms of the single
parameter Ue does not exclude that this energy shift might be of an origin other than the elec-
tron screening. There are, however, no known eﬀects speciﬁc for metals which could provide
such a large energy push for the reacting nuclei. As discussed by You et al. [16], channelling
of deuterons through the metal matrix or the interior adsorption eﬀects can be described by
an energy shift with a value much smaller than 10 eV, whereas screening from bound as well
as from free electrons leads to signiﬁcantly larger Ue values. The theoretical estimations for
the electron screening energies have been performed mainly for deuterons implanted in pal-
ladium and in titanium, because of the interests related to cold-fusion experiments [17, 18].
Both metals distinguish themselves by large diﬀusion coeﬃcients of deuterons in the metal
matrix. Zirconium also possesses a similar feature. The theoretical value of the screening
energy calculated for palladium as the diﬀerence between the binding energies of an α-particle
and two deuterons [19] reaches only the value of 80 eV which is a factor 4 less than the
experimental value for zirconium and tantalum and a factor 2.5 less than the value for alu-
minium. This kind of estimation can be treated as an upper limit for Born-Oppenheimer–like
calculations which, by deﬁnition, can include only static eﬀects (the ion velocity converges
to zero).
A similar value has been determined by Ichimaru [8] using screening potentials
obtained from the dispersion relation of the dielectric constant of the palladium deuteride.
Such large discrepancies between theoretical and experimental values can indicate that the
description of the electron screening should go beyond the static Born-Oppenheimer limit to
include possible collective or dynamical eﬀects for metallic electrons. One such approach is
the time-dependent Hartree-Fock approximation [20]. In the frame of this method it could
recently be shown that the screening energy of the system d + D2 (a gas target) depends on
the motion direction of the incident deuteron with respect to the symmetry axis of the target
molecule D2. Similar calculations for metal hydrides have not been carried out so far because
a large number of electron conﬁgurations has to be included. Another possibility to go beyond
the Born-Oppenheimer approximation was presented by Federovich [21]. His method is based
on the simultaneous solution of the Poisson and Schr¨odinger equations in the approximation
of slow (s-wave) electrons. He could show that the resulting screening potential between two
reacting deuterons embedded in a free-electron sea becomes negative (attractive) at distances
of about one Bohr radius. This eﬀect could not be achieved in any other calculation.

In conclusion, we have determined the electron screening energies for d+d fusion reactions
in metallic environments. The large values of Ue and its target material dependence are theo-
retically not understood at present, which should be a challenge for future theoretical as well
as experimental studies. On the one hand, the observed enhancement of the electron screening
in metal targets can, in tendency, explain the small neutron production rates observed in the
cold-fusion experiment of Jones [18]. According to calculations of Hora et al. [22], the corre-
sponding value of the screening energy should amount to about 470 eV. On the other hand,
larger values of the screening energies imply an increase of the reaction rates in astrophysical
strong coupled plasmas. For weak coupled plasmas [23], including the Sun, this enhancement,
although weaker, can also be of importance.


REFERENCES

Salpeter E. E., Aust. J. Phys., 7 (1954) 373.
Assenbaum H. J., Langanke K. and Rolfs C., Z. Phys. A, 327 (1987) 461.
Rolfs C. and Somorjai E., Nucl. Instrum. Methods B, 99 (1995) 297.
Langanke K., Shoppa T. D., Barnes C. A. and Rolfs C., Phys. Lett. B, 369 (1996) 211.
Czerski K., Huke A., Bucka H., Heide P., Ruprecht G. and Unrau B., Phys. Rev. C, 55
(1997) 1517.
Greife U. et al., Z. Phys. A, 351 (1995) 107.
Shoppa T. D., Koonin S. E., Langanke K. and Seki R., Phys. Rev. C, 48 (1993) 837.
Ichimaru S., Rev. Mod. Phys., 65 (1993) 252.
See also Czerski K., Huke A., Heide P., Hoeft M. and Ruprecht G., Nuclei in the Cosmos
V, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Nuclear Astrophysics, July 6-11, 1998 Volos,
Greece, edited by N. Prantzos and S. Harissopulos (Editions Fronti`eres) p. 152.
Huke A., PhD thesis, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, 2001.
Brown R. E. and Jarmie N., Phys. Rev. C, 41 (1990) 1391.
Myers S. M. et al., Phys. Rev. B, 43 (1991) 9503.
Anderson H. and Ziegler J. F., The Stopping and Ranges of Ions in Matter, Vol. 3 (Pergamon
Press, New York) 1977.
Cecil F. E., Liu H., Yan J. S. and Hale G. M., Phys. Rev. C, 47 (1993) 1178.
Vogler M. and Meierjohann B., Z. Phys. A, 283 (1977) 11.
You J. H., Cheng F. H., Cheng F. Z. and Huang F. H., Phys. Rev. B, 43 (1991) 7293.
Fleischmann M., Pons S. and Hawkins M., J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) 301.
Jones S. E. et al., Nature, 338 (1989) 737.
Legett A. J. and Baym G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 63 (1989) 191.
Shoppa T. D. et al., Nucl. Phys. A, 605 (1996) 387.
Federovich G. V., Phys. Lett. A, 164 149 (1992.)
Hora H. et al., Phys. Lett. A, 175 (1993) 138.
Brown L. S. and Sawyer R. F., Rev. Mod. Phys., 69 (1997) 411.
